Title: Signed, Sealed, Delivered: An Introduction to Covenant Theology
Author: J.V. Fesko


Acknowledgments





“I count myself in nothing else so happy, As in a soul rememb’ring my good friends,” William Shakespeare once wrote (Richard II, 2.3.46–47). I am grateful for the people of Ligonier Ministries, their collegiality over the years, and their invitation to write for the ministry. Many thanks to Aaron Garriott, managing editor for Ligonier Ministries, for his partnership in my writing for Tabletalk, for encouraging me to write this wee book, and for the whole publishing team to see it to press, especially Kevin D. Gardner and Karen Magnuson, for carefully working through the manuscript and offering many helpful corrections and clarifications. I am thankful to two former students and now ministerial colleagues, Jonathan Cruse and Harrison Perkins. They were gracious enough to read this book at an earlier stage and offer suggestions, criticism, and feedback to make it better. I am grateful for their help and indeed “count myself in nothing else so happy” in counting them as brothers, colleagues, and friends.

I am especially grateful to my wife for her assistance. She carefully read through the whole book and made many helpful suggestions, posed good questions, and assisted me in many other ways. Thank you, Anneke, for your love, for your companionship, and for your faith in Christ that always encourages me to seek Him in all things. I am grateful that covenant is not an abstract idea but something that we live out in our marriage daily, and I pray that our covenant bond is a reflection of and points to Christ’s covenant marriage to His church—that our marriage points to heavenly realities. I am thankful to my children, John Jr., Robert, and Carmen, for their love—you make me want to be a better father, and you extend to me covenant mercies when you forgive me for my sins and shortcomings. My prayer is that you too will read this book and revel in its truths—that you would praise our triune God for His unfailing covenant mercies.

I dedicate this book to someone who loves covenant theology, J. Ligon Duncan III, chancellor of Reformed Theological Seminary. Ligon is a friend who goes back nearly a quarter-century as he took a chance on me and was willing to publish my doctoral dissertation and then later publish a paper I wrote on the doctrine of justification in the midst of the controversies surrounding the New Perspective on Paul. Ligon loves covenant theology so much that he has taught the seminary’s course on the topic more than thirty-four times as of the writing of this book. He and his wife, Anne, have shown me and my family friendship, love, and kindness as I joined the RTS faculty full time at the Jackson, Miss., campus after serving for nearly twenty years as an adjunct at the Atlanta campus. I am grateful not only for Ligon’s tireless work for the seminary, his kind and friendly manner, and his commitment to the Westminster Standards but also for his love for and service to the church both at home and abroad. He has narrow convictions but wide associations because of his interest in spreading the truth of Christ. Thank you, Ligon, for your friendship and your labors for Christ’s church.





Preface





I have never known a day apart from Christ’s love. I was raised in a Christian home by two loving parents, and I can distinctly remember one evening kneeling by my bed with my mother and praying to receive Christ when I was four years old. I grew up in the cradle of the church, but it was not until I enrolled in seminary that the doctrine of the covenants began to make an impression on me. As prevalent as the doctrine is in Scripture, the word “covenant” regularly passed by my eyes without raising my curiosity. In seminary, I naturally dove deeper into the Bible and began to see covenants throughout its pages. During my doctoral studies, I undertook a much more detailed study of the doctrine of the covenants because my Baptist convictions had shifted to Reformed theology, and I wanted to be sure that I could in good conscience administer baptism to both adults and infants. My study of the covenants and their attending signs cemented classic Reformed covenant theology in my heart and mind—I was convinced that it was and is thoroughly biblical.

When I graduated with my doctorate, I was called to be a church planter and later pastor, which gave me the opportunity to preach and teach through multiple books of the Bible. Especially formative in my ministry was preaching through the Pentateuch. Studying these books afforded me greater opportunity to immerse myself in God’s covenants. This study fed my teaching and writing: I first put fingers to keyboard and discussed covenant theology in my book Last Things First: Unlocking Genesis with the Christ of Eschatology, in which I treated the covenants of works and grace. I was eventually called to serve as a full-time seminary professor, continued to study covenant theology, and started a larger project to write historical and doctrinal books on the covenants of redemption and works:





The Covenant of Redemption: Origins, Development, and Reception

The Trinity and the Covenant of Redemption

The Covenant of Works: The Origins, Development, and Reception of the Doctrine

Adam and the Covenant of Works



God willing, I hope to complete my covenant theology project by adding at least a fifth volume on the covenant of grace in the not-too-distant future.

I was enthusiastic when Ligonier Ministries approached and asked me to write a primer on covenant theology, which I present here. This work is intended for the person in the pew who wants to understand more about the covenants of Scripture. At the end of each chapter, I have included questions for review, which are intended to facilitate personal or small-group studies. This book can also well serve young people who want to better grasp God’s covenants. The book is unencumbered by footnotes for the sake of simplicity. Reading great books on covenant theology is vital, but in this primer, I want readers to focus first on what Scripture itself says. Those who want to dig deeper may consult the appendix, where I recommend books for further study. I do not want to give the impression, however, that I have come to my knowledge of covenant theology on my own. My previously published books on covenant theology are my footnotes, if you will, to this book.

In most cases, I quote the English Standard Version of the Bible, unless otherwise noted, and in some cases I provide my own translation in my effort to enable readers to see more clearly what the original Greek or Hebrew text says. In those places, I have used the designation “author’s translation.”

My hope and prayer are that Christians would profit from this wee book and that it would give them a clearer understanding of how God has drawn near to us in Christ through the Spirit by His covenants. From beginning to end, God has revealed His love through the covenants of Scripture to bring about His wonderful plan of salvation. God willing, this book is one small step in helping the church better appreciate God’s covenants with His people.





Introduction





“Let us rejoice and exult and give him the glory, for the marriage of the Lamb has come” (Rev. 19:7). The Bible ends with the celebration of the marriage feast of the Lamb, as Christ’s bride, the church, is decked in “fine linen, bright and pure” (v. 8). The angel told John, “Blessed are those who are invited to the marriage supper of the Lamb” (v. 9). Yet the binding relationship of marriage profoundly displays what it means to be in covenant. When the prophet Malachi censured his fellow Israelites for their lax attitudes toward marriage, he said: “You cover the LORD’s altar with tears, with weeping and groaning because he no longer regards the offering or accepts it with favor from your hand. But you say, ‘Why does he not?’ Because the LORD was witness between you and the wife of your youth, to whom you have been faithless, though she is your companion and your wife by covenant” (Mal. 2:13–14). Marriage is another way of saying covenant, and God has redeemed us through His covenant in Christ. The covenant-marriage theme runs throughout all of Scripture, which gives us a window into God’s covenants with His people. Adam and Eve were husband and wife, but their sin introduced death, conflict, and evil into the world. God promised that the Seed of the woman would crush the head of the serpent. When Paul calls Jesus “the last Adam” (1 Cor. 15:45), he implicitly claims that there is also a last Eve, the church. If the first Adam failed to love and obey God, then the last Adam would come and love His heavenly Father by obeying Him and would love His bride by laying down His life for her.





The Covenant Theme in Scripture


God’s Word traces the covenant line throughout the Scriptures, wherein He slowly unveils His plan to redeem His people. God enters into a marriage covenant with Israel at Mount Sinai, and He signals that marital love is the way back to the blessings of Eden in the Song of Solomon, a ballad that celebrates love and marriage. For this reason, first-century rabbis called the Song of Solomon the Holy of Holies of the Old Testament. In fact, we can say that the Song of Solomon is a commentary on paradise lost and recovered. But Israel was a faithless bride—she broke her marriage covenant with God—as the prophet Hosea shows in the living parable of his marriage to Gomer, “a wife of whoredom” (Hos. 1:2). In spite of Israel’s faithlessness to the covenant, God faithfully sent His Son, Jesus, who “loved the church and gave himself up for her, that he might sanctify her, having cleansed her by the washing of water with the word, so that he might present the church to himself in splendor, without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, that she might be holy and without blemish” (Eph. 5:25–27). God incarnate, Jesus Christ, entered into a covenant with His bride, the church, to redeem her.

Covenant is embossed across the pages of Scripture, and it is a theme about which all Christians know something. We implicitly know of the doctrine of the covenant when we contemplate Christ’s redemption of the church and trace it from Genesis to Revelation. Paul, for example, explains Genesis 2:24 in Ephesians 5:31–32: “‘Therefore a man shall leave his father and mother and hold fast to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh.’ This mystery is profound, and I am saying that it refers to Christ and the church.” In one sense, this covenantal marriage portrait is like Claude Monet’s impressionist painting Water Lilies, a work that captures clusters of water lilies as they float atop the surface of the water that reflects trees in its shimmering surface. As we stand far off, the marriage covenant between Christ and the church is beautiful and marked by brushstrokes of love, mercy, and grace. But when we look more closely at the details, we see the blobs of paint and color where features blur and the picture becomes less clear. Similarly, we might struggle to relate the various covenants of Scripture to the marriage covenant between Christ and His church. How do the covenants with Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and David all fit together? Why, if God is faithful to His promises, did He make a new covenant? Alternatively, in the terms of historic Reformed covenant theology, how do the covenants of redemption, works, and grace all relate?

This book is a primer, or introduction, to classic Reformed covenant theology that emerged from the sixteenth-century Protestant Reformation. The book explains:

• The covenant of redemption: the eternal intra-Trinitarian covenant among Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.



• The covenant of works: the covenant that God made with Adam when He created him and placed him in the garden of Eden.



• The covenant of grace: the means by which God saves His people through the work of the Son and Spirit.





Plan of the Book


Chapter 1 begins with the question of what a covenant is. “Covenant” appears throughout the Scriptures, but not all theologians agree on a definition. This first chapter explains that the best way to describe a covenant at its most fundamental level is as an agreement between two or more persons. Beyond this definition, context determines the characteristics of the various covenants. There are all sorts of agreements, and this is true of biblical covenants—there are different types of covenants. The chapter surveys the characteristics of covenants, including oaths, laws, animals, blessings and curses, love, witnesses, and signs. It then explores the different types of covenants, such as the covenant among the members of the Godhead, the covenants between God and humans, and covenants between humans.

Chapter 2 examines the covenant before the covenants, the eternal agreement among Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, which theologians have called the covenant of redemption. To say that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit made a covenant may sound speculative, but the chapter shows that the Bible reveals covenantal activity in the Father’s sending of the Son to redeem a people, and the Father and Son’s sending of the Spirit to apply the Son’s work. Jesus, for example, declares, “I covenant to you a kingdom as my Father covenanted to me a kingdom” (Luke 22:29, author’s translation). When did the Father covenant a kingdom to the Son? This chapter answers this question from Scripture and explains the requirements and promises of the covenant of redemption and its relationship to the covenant of grace.

Chapter 3 covers the covenant of works, God’s covenant with Adam. Although the word covenant does not appear in Genesis 1–3, many covenantal elements within the first three chapters of the Bible signal the presence of a covenant. And when Genesis is read within the larger canonical context, there is an abundance of evidence to prove the covenant’s existence even in the first book of the Bible. This chapter surveys the biblical data in both the Old and New Testaments and expounds the doctrine, including the parties, commands, curses and blessings, imputation, and signs of the covenant.

Chapter 4 examines the covenant of grace. Once Adam and Eve fell and disqualified themselves from receiving the blessing of eternal life through the covenant of works, God was merciful and promised to send One who would take up Adam’s abandoned work. This covenant originates in the covenant of redemption and finds its fulfillment in the historical outworking of God’s promise to Adam and Eve to redeem them through the Seed of the woman, the One who would crush the head of the serpent. The covenant of works rested on the perfect, personal, and perpetual obedience of Adam, but now our salvation rests in Christ’s perfect obedience. The only way to lay hold of Christ’s obedience is by grace alone through faith alone in Christ alone. The chapter explores the covenant of grace from God’s first promise to Adam and Eve in Genesis 3:15 through the various covenants of Scripture: the Noahic, Abrahamic, Mosaic, Davidic, and new covenants. The chapter also shows how Jesus fulfills Adam’s work as the last Adam and how sinners participate in the covenant of grace.

Chapter 5 addresses the subject of covenant signs. God reveals Himself and His covenants both in words and in things. As He administers His various covenants, God provides signs (or sacraments), sacred symbols, to accompany them: He gave Adam the trees of knowledge and life, gave Noah a rainbow, commanded Abraham to be circumcised, commanded Israel to observe the Sabbath, showed His faithfulness to David through his heirs, and instituted baptism and the Lord’s Supper through Jesus as the signs of the new covenant. What the Word of God is to our ears, the sacraments are to our other senses—taste, touch, smell, and sight. God preaches His covenant promises to our whole being, body and soul. This chapter also explores how covenant signs function by examining why the covenant of grace transitions from circumcision to baptism. Circumcision and baptism tell the story of Christ’s work and subsequent outpouring of the Spirit, and the church now baptizes both young and old to testify that Christ has baptized the entire creation. This Spirit baptism is the means of the church’s salvation and the unbelieving world’s judgment.

Chapter 6 looks at the relationship between covenant and church. Many recognize that God saves sinners through Christ’s work in the covenant of grace, but they fail to see how the doctrine of the covenant touches their daily lives. God does not save us as individuals to live as lone rangers. Rather, He saves us in Christ and joins us to His body, the church, the covenant community. Thus, the Christian life unfolds within the context of the covenant community. Church and covenant intersect in three chief areas: reading the Bible, professing the faith, and living the Christian life. We do not read the Bible by ourselves, imposing on it whatever meaning suits us. We read the Bible in covenant with the rest of the church—and not just the church today, but the church throughout the ages. We learn from Christ’s gifts to the church, pastors and teachers, and we consult the church’s great creeds and confessions to standardize our reading of Scripture. In this fashion, we do not profess a faith of our own making; we profess the faith that was once delivered to the saints, the faith of the covenant people of God. And when we live the Christian life, we do so with the covenant community, which holds us accountable to God’s moral law by discipling us and, if necessary, by administering formal church discipline. Accountability and discipline are not about rules and punishment but about the covenant community encouraging one another to live in a manner that is pleasing to our covenant Lord.

The book concludes with summary observations about covenant theology and offers a brief appendix that recommends books for further study. Many contemporary books written on covenant theology populate the landscape, but there is also a trove of old books on classic covenant theology. Rather than recommending only new books, this brief chapter gives a road map to old books so that the fresh breeze of centuries past can blow through our minds and remind us of truths that we have forgotten. We can sit at the feet of some of the church’s greatest minds and learn from them as they explain God’s covenants. This volume also contains a glossary with definitions of key terms to facilitate reading this book and continued study.

In the end, salvation begins in the eternal covenant of redemption by which the Father sends His Son in love to redeem a people, His bride, and the Father and Son pour out their love through the Spirit to gather the Son’s bride. Jesus comes as the Son of Man, One like Adam, to reverse the curse and fulfill Adam’s failed covenantal work, and He makes it available to sinners through the covenant of grace for all who receive God’s gift of faith. From beginning to end, God speaks to us in the Bible only through covenant, so we must seek to understand what a covenant is and how God gives us salvation through the covenant of grace. Only when we stand back and see God’s masterpiece from afar can we also appreciate each brushstroke, color, and hue as we marvel at every detail.





1



What Is a Covenant?





Covenant is a difficult word to define. The word appears 301 times in the English Standard Version, which means that it is a common word. But what is a covenant? A very simple definition comes to us from the Children’s Catechism, which defines a covenant as “an agreement between two or more persons.” This definition captures the essence of a covenant and rests on solid biblical footing. Isaiah indicts Israel for her sin: “Because you have said, ‘We have made a covenant with death, and with Sheol we have an agreement’” (Isa. 28:15; see also 28:18; 30:1; Dan. 11:6, 17). The prophet employs a common Hebrew poetic literary device by placing two statements in parallel that have the same meaning. He uses a synonymous parallelism to show that “covenant” and “agreement” are interchangeable. At the same time, we can note that there are all sorts of agreements.

So what is the determining factor in understanding the nature of the various covenants, or agreements, that appear in the Scriptures? We do not want to place a straitjacket on Scripture and force a strict definition of “covenant” wherever we see the term appear. In fact, a general definition of a word never determines the word’s full meaning. Rather, the word’s context within a sentence or passage always determines its meaning. If, for example, we define trunk exclusively as a square box used for storing clothing, we quickly run into trouble when we find that cars, trees, and elephants all have trunks. The context of the word creates a frame of meaning so that when I say, “Get the trunk from the attic,” you know that you’re not looking for part of an animal, car, or tree. The context of a word determines its meaning. As we apply this principle to covenants, we can observe that there are various types of covenants (or agreements) in Scripture but that the context determines what type of covenant is in view. To understand the nature of biblical covenants, this chapter first delves into their characteristics. Second, the chapter explains the different types of covenants that we find in Scripture. Finally, the chapter concludes with summary observations about biblical covenants.





Characteristics


Several common characteristics appear in the various biblical covenants, such as oaths, laws, animal sacrifices, blessings and curses, love, witnesses, and signs. No covenant bears all of these marks, but each covenant bears one or more of these common characteristics.





Oaths


Given that the Bible provides a basic definition of a covenant as an agreement, we can logically take a step back and ask, “How do agreements come about?” One of the most common ways is that two people speak and determine the parameters of the agreement. In the ancient biblical world, people determined and fixed their covenants by swearing an oath. When Abraham and Abimelech disputed over water wells, Abraham resolved the issue by making a covenant with the gentile king (Gen. 21:27). The narrative then observes: “Therefore that place was called Beersheba, because there both of them swore an oath. So they made a covenant at Beersheba” (vv. 31–32). Swearing an oath is how a covenant, or agreement, is made. This same oath-making pattern appears with God’s dealings with Israel. God spoke through the prophet Ezekiel and impeached His people: “I will deal with you as you have done, you who have despised the oath in breaking the covenant” (Ezek. 16:59; see also 2 Kings 11:4; Ezek. 17:13, 16, 18–19). The prophet Hosea similarly charged the people of Israel: “They utter mere words; with empty oaths they make covenants” (Hos. 10:4). Oath and covenant also converge in Zechariah’s prophecy about God’s faithfulness, that He would “show the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant, the oath that he swore to our father Abraham” (Luke 1:72–73).





Laws


A second characteristic that marks covenants is that God administers His laws by them: “He remembers his covenant forever, the word that he commanded, for a thousand generations, the covenant that he made with Abraham, his sworn promise to Isaac, which he confirmed to Jacob as a statute, to Israel as an everlasting covenant” (Ps. 105:8–10). The psalmist reveals a number of parallel legal terms that overlap with the covenant concept. God’s covenant is “the word that he commanded,” but at the same time God’s commands intersect with His “sworn promise to Isaac,” His oath. But this same covenant with Abraham, the sworn oath to Isaac, is also a statute to Jacob. When God makes His covenants (or agreements) with human beings, they can have a promissory character (that is, they rest on God’s promises), such as His covenant with Abraham, or they can have more of a legal emphasis, such as His covenant with Israel.





Animal Sacrifices


A third common feature of covenants is the sacrifice of animals. When God made a covenant with Abraham, He told him to gather a number of different animals: “Bring me a heifer three years old, a female goat three years old, a ram three years old, a turtledove, and a young pigeon” (Gen. 15:9). Abraham then cut the animals in half and created an aisle between the severed animal halves (v. 10). Abraham’s actions mirror another aspect of covenant-making practice, in that when parties made a covenant, they literally “cut” the covenant. Genesis 15:18 literally states: “On that day he cut a covenant with Abraham” (in the Pentateuch, e.g., see also Gen. 21:27, 32; 26:28; 31:44; Ex. 23:32; 24:8; 34:10, 12, 15, 27; Deut. 4:23; 5:2; 7:2; 9:9; 29:1, 12, 14, 25; 31:16). Why did Abraham cut the animals in two? Moreover, as the narrative unfolds, why did God cause a deep sleep to fall on Abraham (Gen. 15:12)? And why did God, represented by the smoking fire pot and flaming torch, pass between the severed animals (v. 17)?

The prophet Jeremiah illuminates this ancient practice when he brings God’s covenant lawsuit against Israel:





And the men who transgressed my covenant and did not keep the terms of the covenant that they made before me, I will make them like the calf that they cut in two and passed between its parts—the officials of Judah, the officials of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, the priests, and all the people of the land who passed between the parts of the calf. And I will give them into the hand of their enemies and into the hand of those who seek their lives. Their dead bodies shall be food for the birds of the air and the beasts of the earth. (Jer. 34:18–20)



Jeremiah explains the purpose of cutting the animals in two. When parties made a covenant (or agreement), they sealed the deal by cutting animals in half, creating an aisle between the halves, and walking between the severed halves. Walking between the severed animal halves meant that both parties “cut the covenant” and sealed their oaths to create the agreement. Their covenant was an oath sealed with blood, but the prophet also revealed that walking between the animal halves was a form of self-malediction or swearing a curse on one’s own head. In other words, the covenant parties invoked blessings and curses on themselves as the benefits or consequences of keeping or breaking the covenant.





Blessings and Curses


When parties make a covenant, there are mutual blessings for keeping the terms of the agreement and consequences for violating them. God made His covenant with Israel when the people gathered at the foot of Sinai on the heels of their redemption from Egypt. God told them, “Now therefore, if you will indeed obey my voice and keep my covenant, you shall be my treasured possession among all peoples, for all the earth is mine” (Ex. 19:5). God elaborated the blessings and curses of the covenant when He revealed the law. He forbade Israel from making carved images and worshiping them. For those who disobeyed His law, He would visit “the iniquity of the fathers on the children to the third and the fourth generation” of those who hated Him, but for those who loved Him, He would show His “steadfast love to thousands” (20:4–6). In short, for those covenanted with God, “the LORD’s curse is on the house of the wicked, but he blesses the dwelling of the righteous” (Prov. 3:33). In His covenants, God sets forth blessings and curses. Amazingly, God at times even submits Himself to the curse of the covenant! When God made His covenant with Abraham, Abraham fell into a deep sleep, and God alone passed between the severed animal halves. We will revisit this idea in subsequent chapters, but God made His covenant with Abraham and swore a self-maledictory oath upon Himself. He essentially promised Abraham, “If I break My word, I, your God, will suffer the curses of the covenant, and if you break your word, I, your God, will suffer the curses of the covenant.”





Love


One of the most important characteristics of biblical covenants is love, a concept that we might not immediately connect with an agreement. When people enter an agreement, they create a relationship, a formal bond. How will the parties act within the context of this bond? Will they keep or break their oath? The Bible frames this ethical question in terms of love: “Know therefore that the LORD your God is God, the faithful God who keeps covenant and steadfast love with those who love him and keep his commandments, to a thousand generations” (Deut. 7:9). In this statement, the English Standard Version renders a common covenantal term, hesed, as “steadfast love,” which other translations render as “mercy” (KJV), “covenant of love” (NIV), “unfailing love” (NLT), or “covenant loyalty” (NRSV). These different translations seek to capture the idea that God pours out His love on His people—He keeps His oath; He is faithful to His promise. Conversely, the covenant is supposed to show how God’s people love their faithful covenant Lord. God promised to keep His steadfast love with Israel, the love He swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (v. 12). When Solomon dedicated the newly constructed temple, he proclaimed, “O LORD, God of Israel, there is no God like you, in heaven above or on earth beneath, keeping covenant and showing steadfast love to your servants who walk before you with all their heart” (1 Kings 8:23; see also 2 Chron. 6:14). God’s covenant love is a refrain that comes from the mouths of other Old Testament prophets and sonorously reverberates throughout the whole of Scripture (e.g., Neh. 1:5; 9:32; Ps. 25:10; Dan. 9:4; John 3:16; Eph. 1:4–5; 1 John 4:9–10).





Witnesses


When parties make a covenant, another common feature is that there are witnesses. Think, for example, of a wedding ceremony (which is a marriage covenant), at which the officiant often says, “Dearly beloved: We have come together in the presence of God and these witnesses for the joining together of this man and this woman in holy matrimony.” Witnesses are important for a covenant because they can then testify and affirm that the parties entered into an agreement, knowing what the terms are, and can also hold the parties accountable to their oaths if necessary. Jacob made a covenant with his father-in-law, Laban, and said: “Come now, let us make a covenant, you and I. And let it be a witness between you and me” (Gen. 31:44). Jacob then had his kinsmen gather stones to make a heap—a memorial and reminder that Jacob’s relatives were witnesses to the covenant. The heap of stones pointed to the fact that Jacob’s kinsmen were witnesses to the covenant between Jacob and Laban. God does something similar when He renews His covenant with Israel: “Take this Book of the Law and put it by the side of the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, that it may be there for a witness against you” (Deut. 31:26). The Book of the Law (the series of laws that God gave to His people that appears in the Pentateuch, the first five books of the Bible) would serve as a witness, as something to hold the people accountable to their covenant oath.





Signs


When God makes covenants, He swears an oath—He reveals His spoken word. In addition to His spoken word, He reveals knowledge about Himself in the form of physical signs—concrete things taken from the creation that signify His covenants. God gave the sign of a rainbow in His covenant with Noah (Gen. 9:13), circumcision in His covenant with Abraham (Gen. 17:9–14), and the Sabbath in the Mosaic covenant (Ex. 31:13). The use of signs in concert with His covenants is part of God’s overall manner by which He reveals knowledge about Himself. God speaks, then He acts, and then He speaks again, interpreting His speech and actions. Think back to the creation. God says, “Let there be light.” God speaks. God then acts: “And there was light” (Gen. 1:3). And then God speaks again through His word and interprets His earlier speech and action: “And God saw that the light was good” (v. 4). In short, God is His own interpreter, which is especially true with His covenantal signs. God swears His oath to Noah: “I establish my covenant with you, that never again shall all flesh be cut off by the waters of the flood, and never again shall there be a flood to destroy the earth” (9:11). God speaks. God then acts by giving the sign of the rainbow: “I have set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be a sign of the covenant between me and the earth” (v. 13). God speaks; He acts; and He speaks again with His interpretive word: “When I bring clouds over the earth and the bow is seen in the clouds, I will remember my covenant that is between me and you and every living creature of all flesh. And the waters shall never again become a flood to destroy all flesh” (vv. 14–15).





Different Types of Covenants


The common characteristics of oaths, laws, animal sacrifices, blessings and curses, love, witnesses, and signs are common to covenants, but this does not mean that all covenants are the same. We must let the specific context of each covenant show us its nature rather than creating an abstract definition and then forcing the various types of covenants into this mold. There are three major types of covenants in the Bible: the covenant among the members of the Trinity—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; the covenants between God and humans; and covenants between humans. Again, while at its most fundamental level a covenant is an agreement, the agreements take on different characteristics depending on the parties involved.





God


The first main category is the covenant among Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Theologians have historically labeled this covenant the pactum salutis, or “covenant of redemption.” In one sense, this is the covenant of covenants, since the triune God makes it in eternity before the creation of the world. In this covenant, all three participants are equals, since all three persons of the Trinity are fully God. The next chapter addresses this covenant in greater detail.





God and Humans


The second category of covenants encompasses those that God makes with humans. The first of these covenants is the covenant of works, or the covenant that God made with Adam in the initial creation before the fall and the entrance of sin into the world. The second of these covenants is commonly called the covenant of grace, which is the covenant that God made with Adam and Eve right after their fall. God promised them that the Seed of the woman would crush the head of the serpent and deliver them from their sin (Gen. 3:15). We should initially note two things about the covenants of works and grace: (1) the covenant of works is the agreement that God made with Adam and his posterity, but (2) the covenant of grace is an overarching rubric or umbrella under which we include all of God’s redemptive dealings with His chosen but fallen sinners. In the words of Westminster Confession of Faith 7.5, “This covenant was differently administered in the time of the law, and in the time of the gospel.” Another way to put this is that God administered the covenant of grace to Adam and Eve when He promised that the Seed of the woman would deliver them. He then revealed His overarching promise through a series of covenants that run throughout redemptive history: the covenants with Noah (Gen. 6–9), Abraham (Gen. 15), Moses (Ex. 19–24), David (2 Sam. 7:8–17; Ps. 89), and the new covenant (Jer. 31; Heb. 8). While all these covenants are part of the overarching covenant of grace, we should not assume that they all have the same characteristics. We must not flatten out their unique qualities but must recognize how each covenant plays a distinct role within God’s unfolding plan of redemption. The Bible emphasizes another important factor in all of God’s covenantal dealings with humans—He is God, He is the Lord of the covenant, and human beings are His covenantal servants. Even though God and humans are in covenant together and have entered into an agreement, this does not mean that they are equals. Rather, in the iconic words of Westminster Confession 7.1, when God enters into covenants, they represent a “voluntary condescension” on His part. God is under no obligation whatsoever to enter into any covenant with humans.





Humans


Several types of covenants appear among humans in the biblical narrative. The first of them is a friendship covenant, in which two equal parties enter into an agreement because of their bond of friendship, such as Jonathan’s covenant with David (1 Sam. 18:3). A second type of covenant is one of parity, in which two rulers of relatively equal power and authority enter into an agreement, such as Abraham’s covenant with Abimelech (Gen. 21:27). A third type of covenant is a Lord-servant agreement, in which one party is more powerful than the other, such as Joshua’s covenant with the Gibeonites (Josh. 9:15). Note that all of God’s covenants with humans fall into the Lord-servant category. The fourth and final type of covenant is a marriage agreement, the permanent union between a man and a woman. God rebuked His people for their marital infidelity through the prophet Malachi when he said that “the LORD was witness between you and the wife of your youth, to whom you have been faithless, though she is your companion and your wife by covenant” (Mal. 2:14; cf. Prov. 2:17). The marriage covenant commonly occurs between humans, but marriage is also one of the ways that the Bible describes God’s relationship to His people, such as in the book of Hosea. God’s marriage covenant with His people finds its zenith in Christ’s marriage to the church, His bride (Eph. 5:25–33).





Conclusion


What is a covenant? A covenant is an agreement between two or more persons. Context determines the specific nature of the covenant, whether it is among the members of the Trinity, between God and humans, or merely among humans. Each of God’s covenants falls under one of three categories: the covenant among the Trinity, God’s covenant with Adam and his posterity, and His covenant with fallen but elect sinners in Christ. In theological terms, the covenants of redemption, works, and grace cover preredemptive and redemptive history, from before the foundation of the world to its end with the consummation of all things. We therefore turn to the first of the covenants, the covenant of redemption, so that we may have a better understanding of how the triune God covenanted to create and redeem a people.





Questions for Review


1. At its most fundamental level, what is a covenant?



2. What are the common characteristics of a covenant?



3. How does an oath create a covenant?



4. Why did God have Abraham sever animals in half and create an aisle as a part of their covenant?



5. In what way is a covenant the context in which love should flourish?



6. What role do witnesses play in a covenant?



7. What are the three main categories of covenants?



8. What are the different types of covenants among humans?





2



The Covenant of Redemption





When people first hear of an eternal covenant among Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, it might strike them as speculative. How do we know what the Trinity was doing before the creation of the world? In more recent years, some well-known theologians have dismissed the idea as “scholastic sophistry” and have questioned its scriptural basis. On the other hand, what if there is solid biblical evidence for an eternal intra-Trinitarian covenant among Father, Son, and Holy Spirit? If there is, then we have the moral obligation to believe and teach this doctrine as nothing less than God’s revealed truth.

But first, what is the covenant of redemption? Simply, the covenant of redemption is the eternal agreement among Father, Son, and Holy Spirit to create and save a people. More specifically, in the covenant of redemption the Father appoints the Son as covenant surety and Mediator, and the Father and Son determine to send the Spirit to apply the Son’s work to gather and save the elect, those chosen by God unto salvation. The claim of this chapter is that the covenant of redemption is a biblically sound and necessary doctrine because it serves as the eternal foundation of the triune God’s activity in redemptive history. This chapter first briefly surveys the historical origins of the covenant of redemption. Second, it examines its scriptural foundations. Third, the chapter explains its nature and presents a statement of the doctrine. The chapter concludes by linking a series of scriptural pearls on one strand to show the beauty and love of God in the covenant of redemption.





Historical Origins


As with a Monet painting, first impressions can be misleading, but upon closer examination, things become clearer. Such is the case with the historical origins of the covenant of redemption. Some might think that because theologians did not start writing of a covenant between the Father and Son until the sixteenth century, the doctrine is relatively novel and thus suspect. After all, how could theologians in the early church (AD 100–500) and Middle Ages (AD 500–1500) miss the existence of a covenant among Father, Son, and Holy Spirit? While such questions are common and even warranted, there is an important distinction. Do we find pieces of the covenant of redemption in the early church even if its label (covenant of redemption) is absent? The answer to this question is yes. The church fathers wrestled with some of Jesus’ statements in the Bible, such as these: “The Father is greater than I” (John 14:28) and “I glorified you on earth, having accomplished the work that you gave me to do” (17:4). Since the Son is fully equal with the Father, God from God, Light from Light, true God from true God, as the Nicene Creed states, how can the Father be greater than the Son? Moreover, at what point did the Father give the Son work to do? The Bible contains no recorded instance of the Father’s giving the Son work to accomplish. There were various discussions throughout the early church and Middle Ages, but sixteenth-century Reformers shed greater scriptural light on these questions.

Theologians in the Middle Ages had settled on using the Vulgate, the Latin translation of the Scriptures. The Vulgate renders a key statement of Christ as follows: “I appoint [dispono] to you a kingdom as my Father has appointed to me a kingdom” (Luke 22:29). Christ was speaking to His disciples in the upper room as they celebrated the Passover, which was the first Lord’s Supper. He was also laying the groundwork for their Apostolic work in establishing the New Testament church. One of the hallmarks of the sixteenth-century Reformation was a call to return to the sources (ad fontes). Protestant theologians called for a return to the Hebrew and Aramaic of the Old Testament and the Greek of the New Testament. One Reformer, Theodore Beza, who was working on a critical edition of the New Testament based on his careful exegesis of the Greek text, noted the imprecision of the Vulgate’s translation of Luke 22:29. As he read the Greek text, he observed that Luke does not use the term appoint but rather uses covenant (diatithemi), and therefore he translated Luke 22:29 as “I covenant to you a kingdom as my Father covenanted to me a kingdom.” As Beza turned the focusing ring on the camera of his interpretation, he was able to see Christ’s statement with greater clarity. Theologians took Beza’s refined interpretation of the Father’s covenanting a kingdom to the Son and coordinated it with the Son’s appointment as Mediator. One of the key factors in the development of the covenant of redemption as a doctrine was that theologians returned to the original languages of Scripture and obtained a clearer understanding of Christ’s work and its eternal origins within the inner workings of the Trinity.

Based on the scriptural insight of the Father’s covenanting a kingdom to the Son, theologians began to write of an eternal intra-Trinitarian covenant, and the doctrine was at first summarized in a work titled The Sum of Saving Knowledge, written by two seventeenth-century Scottish Presbyterian theologians, David Dickson and James Durham. The Sum was included with Scottish editions of the Westminster Standards and states the following: “God, for the glory of his rich grace, has revealed in his word a way to save sinners, that is, by faith in Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, by virtue of, and according to the tenor of the covenant of redemption, made and agreed upon between God the Father and God the Son, in council of the Trinity, before the world began” (Head 2). Eventually, the doctrine was also officially enshrined in the Savoy Declaration (1658) and the Second London Baptist Confession (1689), the Congregationalist and Baptist versions of the Westminster Confession. Both documents echo Luke 22:29 when they state: “It pleased God, in his eternal purpose, to choose and ordain the Lord Jesus his only begotten Son, according to a covenant made between them both, to be the Mediator between God and man” (8.1). But theological traditions and confessions of faith are necessarily subordinate to the authority of Scripture. We must affirm a doctrine not because it is confessional but because it appears in Scripture.





Scriptural Foundations


Luke 22:29 presses the same questions that John 17:4 generates—namely: When did the Father covenant a kingdom to the Son? When did the Father give the Son a work to accomplish? The immediate answer to these questions comes in John 17:5: “And now, Father, glorify me in your own presence with the glory that I had with you before the world existed.” In John 17:4, Jesus speaks of the Father’s giving Him work to do, and the very next verse sets the context: “before the world existed.” Making speculations about what the triune God was doing before the creation of the world is off-limits. We may speak only when Scripture speaks; when Scripture is silent, we must remain silent. At the same time, a number of passages of Scripture do allow us to eavesdrop on the Trinitarian deliberations that unfolded before the creation of the world. Psalm 110 is one of those passages, with branches that grow into the New Testament.

The psalmist recounts the words of Yahweh to David’s Lord: “The LORD says to my Lord: ‘Sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies your footstool’” (Ps. 110:1). The New Testament confirms that the Father spoke these words to the Son: “And to which of the angels has he ever said, ‘Sit at my right hand until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet’?” (Heb. 1:13; cf. Matt. 22:44; Mark 12:36; Luke 20:42–43). In his Pentecost sermon, the Apostle Peter explains: “Being therefore exalted at the right hand of God, and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this that you yourselves are seeing and hearing. For David did not ascend into the heavens, but he himself says, ‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies your footstool”’” (Acts 2:33–35). The psalmist was given a glimpse into the intra-Trinitarian council where the Father promised to enthrone the Son at His right hand to rule in the midst of His enemies and to give Him the right to pour out the Holy Spirit. But notably, within this same context the psalmist also observes another important event that transpired between Father and Son.

The psalmist writes: “The LORD has sworn and will not change his mind, ‘You are a priest forever after the order of Melchizedek’” (Ps. 110:4). Recall from the previous chapter that swearing an oath is the way that parties create a covenant (Gen. 21:27, 31–32; 2 Kings 11:4; Ezek. 16:59; 17:13, 16, 18–19; Hos. 10:4; Luke 1:72–73). The interchangeability of oath and covenant means that we can translate Psalm 110:4 this way: “The LORD has covenanted and will not change his mind, ‘You are a priest forever after the order of Melchizedek.’” The inspired author of Hebrews reflects on this Old Testament verse when he explains the nature of Christ’s priesthood, and his authoritative interpretation confirms the conclusion that the Father appointed the Son as a Priest by means of a covenantal oath: “And it was not without an oath. For those who formerly became priests were made such without an oath, but this one was made a priest with an oath by the one who said to him: ‘The Lord has sworn and will not change his mind, “You are a priest forever.”’ This makes Jesus the guarantor of a better covenant” (Heb. 7:20–22). The author of Hebrews confirms that the Father appointed the Son as covenant guarantor or surety by means of His oath. A surety is someone who assumes all the legal responsibilities for a covenant. The Father’s oath and the Son’s appointment come clothed in the garments of covenant.

A passage that wraps all these ideas into a small but powerful package is Zechariah 6:13. In brief, the prophet sees a vision of Psalm 110 when he writes of the covenant or “counsel of peace” between Yahweh and the Branch, the Messiah: “Thus says the LORD of hosts, ‘Behold, the man whose name is the Branch: for he shall branch out from his place, and he shall build the temple of the LORD. It is he who shall build the temple of the LORD and shall bear royal honor, and shall sit and rule on his throne. And there shall be a priest on his throne, and the counsel of peace shall be between them both’” (Zech. 6:12–13). The Greek translation of the Old Testament offers the following translation that brings the imagery of Psalm 110 into clearer view: “And he shall receive power, and shall sit and rule upon his throne; and there shall be a priest on his right hand, and a peaceable counsel shall be between them both.” The Priest sits at the right hand of Yahweh.

Another key passage that provides a glimpse into the eternal intra-Trinitarian deliberations is Psalm 2:7. In the second chapter of the Psalter, the author, David, writes of the glorious reign of Messiah, the Anointed of God, whom He installs on Zion, His holy hill (Ps. 2:6). The psalmist then writes: “I will tell of the decree: The LORD said to me, ‘You are my Son; today I have begotten you’” (v. 7). In writing of the Lord’s decree, the psalmist uses the Hebrew term choq, which is a synonym for covenant. Recall the words of Psalm 105:8–10: “He remembers his covenant forever, the word that he commanded, for a thousand generations, the covenant that he made with Abraham, his sworn promise to Isaac, which he confirmed to Jacob as a statute [choq], to Israel as an everlasting covenant.” The psalmist shows that covenant, commanded word, sworn promise, and statute or decree (choq) are synonyms. To what does the psalmist refer when he writes, “I will tell of the decree [or “covenant”]: The LORD said to me, ‘You are my Son; today I have begotten you’” (2:7)? David refers both to the covenant that God made with him and to the eternal covenant that He made with His Son, Jesus.

On the immediate historical horizon, the first covenant that comes into view is the one that God made with David to give him an heir to sit on Israel’s throne: “You have said, ‘I have made a covenant with my chosen one; I have sworn to David my servant: “I will establish your offspring forever, and build your throne for all generations”’” (Ps. 89:3–4; cf. 2 Sam. 7:12–17). Note once again the convergence of making a covenant and swearing an oath. Keep in mind that Psalm 2 is not merely about one of David’s sons, such as Solomon, but about his greater Son, Jesus—the One to whom the Father said, “Sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies your footstool” (Ps. 110:1). In other words, the immediate horizon has David and his sons in view, but this horizon has a foundation that goes back to the covenant that the Father swore to the Son when He appointed Him Priest according to the order of Melchizedek before the creation of the world. These different passages provide the necessary background to Christ’s statement in the upper room, “I covenant to you a kingdom as my Father covenanted to me a kingdom” (Luke 22:29, author’s translation). These passages of Scripture constitute a divine frame that surrounds various New Testament texts of Scripture that explain Christ’s work as Mediator. The covenant among Father, Son, and Holy Spirit frames Christ’s work of redemption.

The Apostle John beats a steady drumbeat throughout his gospel that confirms the existence of the intra-Trinitarian covenant among Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. One of the constant rhythms is that the Father sent the Son and gave Him work to do: “For the works that the Father has given me to accomplish, the very works that I am doing, bear witness about me that the Father has sent me. And the Father who sent me has himself borne witness about me” (John 5:36–37). In fact, Jesus states more than thirty times that the Father sent Him (John 4:34; 5:23–24, 30; 6:38–39, 44, 57; 7:16, 28, 33; 8:16, 18, 26, 29, 42; 9:4; 10:36; 11:42; 12:44–45, 49; 13:20; 14:24; 15:21; 16:5; 17:8, 18, 21, 23, 25; 20:21). Jesus also testifies that the Father and Son sent the Spirit: “But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things and bring to your remembrance all that I have said to you” (John 14:26); “But when the Helper comes, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father, he will bear witness about me” (15:26). Simply stated, no one sends oneself—one can be sent only by another. In this case, in the covenant of redemption the Father sends the Son, and the Son voluntarily goes. Likewise, the Father and Son send the Spirit, and the Spirit willingly goes.

All these passages paint a picture that shows the triune God as covenanting before the foundation of the world. But we need to take all this biblical data and present it in an orderly and logical manner so that we can better grasp it.





Statement of the Doctrine


The biblical passages surveyed above clearly teach that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit determined that the Father would send the Son to redeem, and that the Father and Son would send the Spirit to apply the Son’s work to the elect. In short, this is the covenant of redemption. We can explain the covenant of redemption under three chief headings: its requirements, its promises, and its relationship to the covenant of grace.





Requirements


When the Father gave the Son a work to do and sent Him to redeem His bride, the church, the first requirement is that the Son would assume a human nature. As Paul writes, “But when the fullness of time had come, God sent forth his Son, born of woman, born under the law, to redeem those who were under the law, so that we might receive adoption as sons” (Gal. 4:4–5). The author of Hebrews explains that “he himself likewise partook of the same things, that through death he might destroy the one who has the power of death, that is, the devil, and deliver all those who through fear of death were subject to lifelong slavery” (Heb. 2:14–15). The Son’s assumption of a human nature ensured that He was the perfect Savior, since He was faithful where Adam was faithless and was “one who in every respect has been tempted as we are, yet without sin” (4:15).

Second, the Father appointed the Son as a Priest according to the order of Melchizedek, which means that He would serve as covenant surety and Mediator. A surety is not merely a cosigner on a loan but rather is a person who voluntarily takes on himself all the legal responsibilities of a covenant. In the Son’s role as covenant surety, the Father required that He serve as the federal (or covenantal) Head of the redeemed. Paul writes of the two federal heads, Adam and Jesus, that “sin came into the world through one man, and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because all sinned” (Rom. 5:12). Conversely, “for as by the one man’s disobedience the many were constituted sinners, so by the one man’s obedience the many will be constituted righteous” (v. 19, author’s translation). The respective disobedience or obedience of the two covenantal heads, Adam and Jesus, determines the destinies of those whom they represent: “For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive” (1 Cor. 15:22). Jesus fulfilled His role as covenant Head by being born of a woman under the law to redeem those who were under the law (Gal. 4:4–5). This means that Jesus’ representative obedience is the means by which the elect fulfill the law of God, since Jesus obeys the law on their behalf; correlatively, Jesus bears the curse of the law on behalf of the elect.

Third, once the Son merited and completed the work of salvation, the Father and Son would send the Spirit to apply the Son’s work to His people (Acts 2:33; Gal. 3:14; Eph. 1:13).





Promises


Six promises make up the covenant of redemption. First, the Father promised the Son that He would prepare a body through the work of the Spirit: “Consequently, when Christ came into the world, he said, ‘Sacrifices and offerings you have not desired, but a body have you prepared for me’” (Heb. 10:5, quoting Ps. 40:6). Recall what the angel told Mary when he informed her that she would carry and give birth to the Messiah: “The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; therefore the child to be born will be called holy—the Son of God” (Luke 1:35).

Second, the Father promised the Son to equip Him with the necessary gifts and anoint Him with the Holy Spirit to carry out His work of redemption. The prophet Isaiah writes of this: “Behold my servant, whom I uphold, my chosen, in whom my soul delights; I have put my Spirit upon him; he will bring forth justice to the nations” (Isa. 42:1). When Jesus began His earthly ministry, He went to His hometown of Nazareth and to the synagogue on the Sabbath day. He stood up to read from the scroll of Isaiah and said: “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty those who are oppressed, to proclaim the year of the Lord’s favor” (Luke 4:18–19, quoting Isa. 61:1–2). Jesus then stunningly informed the gathered congregation, “Today this Scripture has been fulfilled in your hearing” (Luke 4:21). When John baptized Jesus in the Jordan River, the Father poured out the Spirit and anointed His Son to equip Him for His work of ministry. As Jesus testified, “For he whom God has sent utters the words of God, for he gives the Spirit without measure” (John 3:34). The roots of the Son’s anointing find their source in the Father’s promise in the covenant of redemption.

Third, the Father promised to support and undergird Jesus in His work and deliver Him from death. Jesus knew the truth of Psalm 16:10: “For you will not abandon my soul to Hades, or let your Holy One see corruption” (Acts 2:27). The Father promised the Son that death would have no hold on Him and that He would raise Him from the dead.

Fourth, the Father promised to reward the Son for His accomplished work, which would enable Him to send out the Spirit to gather His body, the church. Recall the words of Jesus that He and the Father would send the Spirit: “But when the Helper comes, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father, he will bear witness about me” (John 15:26; see also 14:26). The Father and Son were going to send the Spirit to guide the church into all truth (16:13). Peter explained this promise and the significance of Pentecost to the gathered crowd: “Being therefore exalted at the right hand of God, and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this that you yourselves are seeing and hearing” (Acts 2:33). Peter means that the Father promised the Spirit and that Christ received the Father’s promise, and in turn poured out the Spirit on the creation, and especially His church.

Fifth, the Father promised to give to the Son the elect as His reward for His completed work as the blessing of the covenant of redemption. Recall the familiar words of Psalm 2:7: “I will tell of the decree [or “covenant”]: The LORD said to me, ‘You are my Son; today I have begotten you.’” The Messiah is the righteous man of Psalm 1 who ascends Zion, God’s holy hill, because of His perfect, personal, and perpetual obedience, and therefore God enthrones Him at His right hand (Ps. 110:1). As a consequence of His completed work, the Father tells the Son, “Ask of me, and I will make the nations your heritage, and the ends of the earth your possession” (Ps. 2:8). The nations are the Son’s reward, and He lays claim to the Father’s promise in His commission to the church: “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you. And behold, I am with you always, to the end of the age” (Matt. 28:18–20). We see a picture of Christ’s reward in all its glory in the book of Revelation when John writes: “After this I looked, and behold, a great multitude that no one could number, from every nation, from all tribes and peoples and languages, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed in white robes, with palm branches in their hands, and crying out with a loud voice, ‘Salvation belongs to our God who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb!’” (Rev. 7:9–10).

Sixth and finally, the Father promised to reward the Son with all authority and power in heaven and on earth for the government of His church and to reward Him with the glory He possessed before the foundations of the world. Jesus famously acknowledged this reward in His High Priestly Prayer: “I glorified you on earth, having accomplished the work that you gave me to do. And now, Father, glorify me in your own presence with the glory that I had with you before the world existed” (John 17:4–5; cf. Phil. 2:5–11).





The Relationship to the Covenant of Grace


In addition to the three requirements and the six promises, we should note the relationship between the covenants of redemption and grace. The covenant of redemption is eternal and is among Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. The covenant of grace is God’s covenant with the elect-but-fallen-sinner-in-Christ to save him, and it unfolds in redemptive history. The covenant of redemption is the unassailable foundation of the covenant of grace. The promises of salvation rest on the unchanging promises of God in the covenant of redemption, which guarantees that the covenant of grace will unquestionably accomplish God’s intentions. Finally, the covenant of redemption is the legal basis for the salvation of the elect because within it the Father appoints the Son as covenant Surety, the One who assumes all the legal obligations for fulfilling the law and for paying the penalty for its fracture.





Conclusion


As this chapter concludes, let me draw our attention to the fact that one of the most important elements of the covenant of redemption is love. When people hear of an agreement among Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, they think of a business transaction—a cold, calculated compact. But we must remember that covenants are the arena in which the triune God unfolds His love, and this is certainly true about the covenant of redemption. In that covenant, the Father sends the Son: “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son” (John 3:16). The Son willingly and voluntarily consents to go; Paul points out that Jesus “loved me and gave himself for me” (Gal. 2:20). And the Father and Son send the Spirit: “God’s love has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit” (Rom. 5:5). Love marks every aspect of the covenant of redemption, and within this divine intra-Trinitarian agreement the Father “chose us in [Christ] before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and blameless before him. In love he predestined us for adoption to himself as sons through Jesus Christ, according to the purpose of his will, to the praise of his glorious grace, with which he has blessed us in the Beloved” (Eph. 1:4–6). This is love: the Father sends the Son in love; the Son goes in love; and the Father and Son pour out the Spirit in love.





Questions for Review


1. When did the Father covenant a kingdom to the Son?



2. How does Psalm 110 inform us that the Father appoints the Son as covenant surety and a Priest according to the order of Melchizedek?



3. How does Psalm 2:7 fit into the picture of the covenant of redemption?



4. How many times in John’s gospel does Jesus say that the Father sent Him?



5. What are the requirements of the covenant of redemption?



6. What are the promises of the covenant of redemption?



7. In what way does love cover every aspect of the covenant of redemption?





3



The Covenant of Works





When God created the heavens and the earth, He made the first humans, Adam and Eve, and placed them in the garden of Eden. At first glance, it may seem as though God never entered into a covenant with Adam because we never find the word covenant in the opening chapters of Genesis. Imagine, however, that you are sitting at lunch with a friend, and she receives a phone call. Your friend apologizes and says that she must take the call because it’s important. You sit quietly and see her nod and then ask a series of questions: “Has the caterer confirmed?” “How about the minister; what time will he arrive?” “What about the guest list?” “Has the bridal party confirmed their reservations?” “What time will the florist arrive?” Your friend smiles and then ends her phone call. You heard only half the conversation, but what conclusion would you draw? Was your friend planning a picnic? A hockey game? Or a wedding? Your friend never uttered the word wedding, yet all the pieces of the puzzle tell you that she was talking about a wedding. Just because a term is absent does not mean that the doctrine is absent as well. By listening to your friend’s conversation, you heard the larger context of her phone call and were rightly able to conclude what she was talking about. This is the same strategy that we need to employ to understand how the doctrine of the covenant appears in the opening chapters of the Bible. We need to do more than look for the term. Rather, remembering the various characteristics of covenants (especially oaths, laws, blessings and curses, love, and signs), we can read the immediate context of Genesis 1–3 and observe covenantal elements. But more than the immediate context, we must read Genesis 1–3 in the broader context of the Pentateuch, the first five books of the Bible. We need to recognize that Genesis 1–3 is the opening of the Pentateuch and therefore give attention to how the story of the Pentateuch ends.

What is the covenant of works? The covenant of works is the first covenant that God made with Adam, wherein He promised Adam and his offspring eternal life upon the condition of perfect and personal obedience to His commands. With this definition in hand, we can proceed with the rest of the chapter by first briefly surveying the historical origins of the doctrine. After the historical survey, the chapter explores the biblical evidence within both the immediate and larger canonical contexts. The chapter then takes the biblical evidence and gives an orderly statement of the doctrine. The chapter concludes with summary observations about the covenant of works and one of its most important elements—namely, love.





Historical Origins


When we approach the Bible, we must not think that we are the first to read it. Many others have gone before us in centuries past. The first readers of Scripture were, of course, the people of Israel. And some of the earliest nonbiblical Jewish literature comes to us in what we now call the Apocrypha. To be clear, the Apocrypha is a collection of uninspired books written in the style of Scripture during the intertestamental period, between the prophet Malachi, the last Old Testament book, and the New Testament, from roughly 400 BC to the first century. What use are the books of the Apocrypha if they are uninspired and not part of the canon of Scripture? Although they do not carry the same authority as Scripture, we can nevertheless read these books with great interest because they are some of the earliest commentaries on Scripture. They record how Jewish people before the time of Christ understood various passages of Scripture. In this case, a passage from Sirach 14:17 sheds light on the creation account: “All flesh waxeth old as a garment: for the covenant from the beginning is, Thou shalt die the death” (KJV). This ancient commentary on the creation gives contemporary readers of Scripture two noteworthy observations.

First, this statement quotes the last phrase of Genesis 2:16–17: “And the LORD God commanded the man, saying, ‘You may surely eat of every tree of the garden, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that you eat of it you shall surely die’” (emphasis added). This means that the author of Sirach comments on Genesis 2:16–17. Second, how does he interpret God’s command to Adam? He views God’s command as the administration of a covenant: “For the covenant from the beginning is, Thou shalt die the death.” Long before Christians picked up the Old Testament, Jewish commentators understood that God and Adam were in covenant. Church fathers, such as Augustine of Hippo, encountered Sirach 14:17 and believed that it was an accurate insight and incorporated the idea of an Adamic covenant in their own theology.

Another historical source of an Adamic covenant came from the translation of the Old Testament from Hebrew into Latin. The church father Jerome translated the Scriptures into Latin, the common (or “vulgar”) language of the day, and thus his translation is called the Vulgate. When Jerome translated the book of Hosea, he encountered Hosea 6:7, which can be rendered in one of two ways: “But like Adam they transgressed the covenant” versus “But like men they transgressed the covenant.” The challenge in translating this verse is that the Hebrew term for “man” is also the same term for Adam’s proper name, adam. Does Hosea intend the term to mean that Adam, the first human being, transgressed the covenant or that Israel has transgressed the covenant like common, sinful men? The Greek translation of Hosea opts for the latter: “Like men they transgressed the covenant.” But Jerome was unpersuaded and opted for the first option: “But like Adam they transgressed the covenant.” Jerome’s translation, therefore, is another source for the historical origins of the covenant of works.

By the sixteenth century, Roman Catholic and Protestant theologians were speaking of an Adamic covenant because of the influence of Augustine’s understanding of Sirach 14:17 and Jerome’s translation of Hosea 6:7. By the late sixteenth century, Reformed theologians were speaking of the covenant of works, and the doctrine was eventually codified in several different seventeenth-century confessions. The first confession to enshrine the doctrine was the Irish Articles (1615), written by James Ussher. Article 21 of the Irish Articles states:





Man being at the beginning created according to the image of God (which consisted especially in the Wisdom of his mind and the true Holiness of his free will) had the covenant of the law ingrafted in his heart: whereby God did promise unto him everlasting life, upon condition that he performed entire and perfect obedience unto his Commandments, according to that measure of strength wherewith he was endued in his creation, and threatened death unto him if he did not perform the same.



Ussher does not employ the term covenant of works, but he does speak of the “covenant of the law” engrafted on Adam’s heart whereby God promised him eternal life upon the condition of his perfect obedience to His commands and death if he disobeyed.

Nearly a generation later, the members of the Westminster Assembly presented a similar definition in their confession: “The first covenant made with man was a covenant of works, wherein life was promised to Adam; and in him to his posterity, upon condition of perfect and personal obedience” (WCF 7.2). The Savoy Declaration (1658), the Congregational version of the Westminster Confession, repeats this same definition (7.2). The Second London Baptist Confession (1689), the Baptist version of the Westminster Confession, elsewhere affirms the doctrine: “The covenant of works being broken by sin, and made unprofitable unto life, God was pleased to give forth the promise of Christ, the seed of the woman, as the means of calling the elect, and begetting in them faith and repentance” (20.1; see also 19.6). But as strong as the historical evidence is for the scriptural origins and wide attestation of a covenant between God and Adam, the doctrine’s legitimacy must ultimately rest on the foundation of Scripture.





Biblical Evidence


A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte is a famous painting by nineteenth-century French artist Georges Seurat that features a sunny day in the park where people hold their parasols, boat on the serene, glittering lake, and recline on the cool grass in the shade. If we focus on one part of the painting, such as a young girl holding a bouquet of flowers, we lose sight of the rest of the picture—we fail to see rowers sculling across the placid water, a dog sniffing the turf, or a young girl holding her mother’s hand as she strolls in the warmth of the sun. In our effort to understand the part, it is typically helpful for us to get a larger view of the whole. The wider picture provides the necessary context to facilitate better comprehension, so that we can place the young girl in the wider context of the other people present in the park. If we focus too intently on a very small part of this painting, we likely lose sight of the greater whole. If we take a step back, the smaller part of the painting makes sense in the light of the rest of the picture. Only in the light of the greater whole can we fully appreciate the smaller parts of the painting.

Our examination of covenant first begins within the immediate context of Genesis 1–3 to pinpoint the covenantal elements and then fans out into the broader context of the Pentateuch and finally to the wider canonical context of Scripture.





Context of Genesis 1–3


When God created Adam, He made him in His own image, entailing that Adam naturally knew the difference between right and wrong, since God wrote His law on Adam’s heart (Gen. 1:26; Rom. 2:14–15). In addition to God’s naturally revealed law in creation, He also gave Adam two specially revealed commands. The first command appears in the so-called dominion mandate: “And God blessed them. And God said to them, ‘Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over every living thing that moves on the earth’” (Gen. 1:28). Right off the bat, two covenantal characteristics appear in God’s command. Recall that blessings are a common covenant marker; additionally, God’s law (or commands) is another covenant characteristic. In addition to the command to be fruitful, multiply, and fill and subdue the earth, God commanded Adam not to eat from the Tree of Knowledge: “And the LORD God commanded the man, saying, ‘You may surely eat of every tree of the garden, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that you eat of it you shall surely die’” (2:16–17). This second command continues to point to the existence of a covenant for several reasons.

First, we should once again note the connection between law and covenant. In Genesis 1:28, God commanded Adam to take dominion over the creation, which the text characterizes as a blessing. In the prohibition against eating from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, God adds the potential sanction of death, or covenant curse. To an Old Testament Israelite familiar with the Mosaic covenant and its laws, God’s prohibition would have a familiar ring. God’s command against eating from the tree follows the same form as the commands in the Ten Commandments. “You shall not eat” (Gen. 2:17) in Hebrew contains a negative particle, “you shall not” (lo), which is followed by the imperfect form of the verb “eat” (tochal). This pattern (lo + the imperfect verb form) unfolds in the Decalogue with rhythmic regularity: “You shall have no other gods before me. You shall not make for yourself a carved image. . . . You shall not bow down to them or serve them. . . . You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in vain. . . . You shall not murder. You shall not commit adultery. You shall not steal. You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor. You shall not covet” (Ex. 20:3–17). God’s prohibition against eating from the Tree of Knowledge follows the same pattern that we find in the prohibitions of the Ten Commandments, a covenantal administration of God’s law.

In addition to this, Genesis 2:16–17 contains a motive clause—that is, it provides a reason for obeying the command: “for [chi] in the day that you eat of it you shall surely die” (v. 17). This same pattern unfolds in the Ten Commandments, in which a motive clause follows a command:





You shall not bow down to them or serve them, for [chi] I the LORD your God am a jealous God. . . .

You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in vain, for [chi] the LORD will not hold him guiltless who takes his name in vain.

. . . On it you shall not do any work, you, or your son, or your daughter, your male servant, or your female servant, or your livestock, or the sojourner who is within your gates. For [chi] in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and rested on the seventh day. (Ex. 20:5–11)



An Israelite would hear a covenantal command in God’s prohibition not to eat from the Tree of Knowledge.

Second, the prohibition holds out the prospect of covenant curse—namely, death. The covenant sanction of death is once again common to the Mosaic covenant. When God renewed the Mosaic covenant with Israel as the people prepared to enter the promised land, God held out the prospects of blessing and curse, life and death, just as He had done for Adam when He placed him in the garden: “I call heaven and earth to witness against you today, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and curse” (Deut. 30:19; cf. 11:26–29). Moses spoke these words about the Mosaic covenant, and they equally apply to God’s promises of blessing and curse with Adam.

A third factor that reveals the existence of a covenant between God and Adam is the invocation of God’s covenantal name, Yahweh. Recall that when Moses was shepherding on Mount Horeb and encountered the burning bush, God spoke to Moses out of the flames and revealed His name when Moses drew near: “I am the God [elohi] of your father, the God [elohi] of Abraham, the God [elohi] of Isaac, and the God [elohi] of Jacob” (Ex. 3:6). In this statement God uses a common form of the term for “God,” Elohim. At the same time, God’s statement also reveals His covenant bond with the patriarchs. So when Moses asked God what he should tell the Israelites who had sent him, God responded: “Say this to the people of Israel: ‘The LORD [Yahweh], the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you’” (v. 15). God specifically revealed His covenant name to Moses, a name that God gives only to those with whom He shares a covenantal bond and to whom He gives His love. The revelation of God’s name is no minor thing. Throughout Genesis 1, Moses (the author of the Pentateuch, according to Luke 24:44 and John 5:46) employs the generic name of God, Elohim, thirty-five times (Gen. 1:1–2:3). But in Genesis 2–3 he invokes the covenantal name of God, Yahweh, twenty times. And it is significant that “the LORD [Yahweh] God commanded the man” not to eat from the Tree of Knowledge (2:16–17).

Fourth, the Tree of Knowledge and the Tree of Life are visible signs of God’s words. To put it another way, they are covenant signs, or sacraments. The Tree of Knowledge is a visible manifestation of God’s command, His law, not to eat the fruit of the tree upon the penalty of death. And the Tree of Life is a visual form of God’s implicit promise to give Adam eternal life upon the conclusion of his labors. More will be said about these signs below and in chapter 5 on covenant signs.





Context of the Pentateuch


From the earliest days, Jewish scholars have commented on the Old Testament; one of the best-known commentaries is Genesis Rabbah, which was written between AD 300 and 500. This ancient commentary gives an important interpretive strategy for understanding the opening pages of Scripture:





It is written, But they are like a man (Adam), they have transgressed the covenant (Hos. 6:7). “They are like a man (Adam)” means like Adam: just as I led Adam into the garden of Eden and commanded him, and he transgressed My commandment, whereupon I punished him by dismissal and expulsion, and bewailed him with ekah (how)! (I led him into the garden of Eden, as it is written, And the Lord God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden (Gen. 2:15); and I commanded him: And the Lord God commanded the man (Gen. 2:17); and he transgressed My commandment: Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldst not eat (Gen. 3:11)? And I punished him by dismissal: Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden (Gen. 3:23); and I punished him by expulsion: So he drove out the man (Gen. 3:24); I bewailed him with ekah (how)! And said unto him: ayyekah: ekah is written: so also did I bring his descendants into Eretz Israel and command them, and they transgressed My covenant, and I punished them by sending them away and expelling them, and I bewailed them with ekah! I brought them into Eretz Israel, as it is written, and I brought you into a land of fruitful fields (Jer. 2:7); I commanded them: And thou shalt command the children of Israel (Ex. 27:20), also, Command the children of Israel (Lev. 24:2); they transgressed My command: Yea, all Israel have transgressed Thy law (Dan. 9:11); I punished them by sending them away: Send them away out of my sight, and let them go forth (Jer. 15:1); by expulsion: I will drive them out of my house (Hos. 9:15); and I bewailed them with ekah: Ekah (how) doth the city sit solitary (Lam. 1:1).



The commentary begins with Hosea 6:7 and compares Adam and Israel. Hosea’s juxtaposition of Adam and Israel leads the writer to compare them. The commentary observes that God placed Adam in the garden and Israel in the promised land and that both Adam and Israel violated God’s covenant, and so God exiled them both—He ejected Adam from Eden and Israel from the promised land. This reading strategy is important on two fronts: (1) the author uses Scripture to interpret Scripture—in this case, he employs Hosea 6:7 to understand Genesis 1–3; and (2) he recognizes that Adam’s ejection from the garden anticipates Israel’s expulsion from the promised land. That the commentary appeals to Israel’s exile motivates an examination of the larger context of the Pentateuch, especially the end of Deuteronomy, where Moses speaks of Israel’s looming exile.

In short, under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, Moses bookended the Pentateuch with Genesis 1–3 and Deuteronomy 28–34—the two passages mirror each other. Genesis begins with Adam’s exile, and Deuteronomy ends with Israel’s exile. Moses composed Genesis 1–3 to anticipate God’s covenant with Israel. The pattern of creation, fall, and restoration in Genesis 1–3 foreshadows the construction of the tabernacle (Ex. 25–31) and Israel’s fall and restoration after the golden-calf incident (Ex. 32–34). The structure of the curses and their effects on the serpent, woman, and man (Gen. 3:14–19) anticipate the purity code of Leviticus 11–15. The language of Adam and Eve’s retreat mirrors the Israelites’ withdrawal from Mount Sinai when they feared the ominous presence of God (Gen. 3:8; Ex. 20:18–21). Eve’s sin foreshadows the tenth commandment (Gen. 3:6; Ex. 20:17; Deut. 5:21). Beyond these connections, there are still others.

Adam’s duties of tending and keeping the garden also appear in the priestly duties (Gen. 2:15; Num. 3:7–8). As noted above, the prohibition of eating from the Tree of Knowledge mirrors the prohibitions of the Ten Commandments. Food appears as a prominent feature: the dietary restriction of Genesis 2:16–17 anticipates the dietary laws of Leviticus 11. In fact, in only three places in the Pentateuch do the phrases “do not touch” and “do not eat” appear together:





God said, “You shall not eat [lo tochlau] of the fruit of the tree that is in the midst of the garden, neither shall you touch it [lo tigau], lest you die.” (Gen. 3:3, emphasis added)



You shall not eat [lo tochlau] any of their flesh, and you shall not touch [lo tigau] their carcasses; they are unclean to you. (Lev. 11:8, emphasis added)



And the pig, because it parts the hoof but does not chew the cud, is unclean for you. Their flesh you shall not eat [lo tochlau], and their carcasses you shall not touch [lo tigau]. (Deut. 14:8, emphasis added)



Given these literary connections, Adam’s probation in the garden looks to Israel’s provisional presence in the land.

Both Adam and Israel dwell conditionally in their respective locations, and Leviticus 18:5 summarizes the principles at work: “You shall therefore keep my statutes and my rules; if a person does them, he shall live by them: I am the LORD.” This is not to say that Adam and Israel dwell in their respective locations on the same premises. Adam lives under a state of law with no prospects of repentance and return to the garden, whereas Israel has the possibility of repenting and returning to the land. In theological shorthand, Adam was under the covenant of works and Israel was under the covenant of grace. Nevertheless, on the large-scale picture, Israel as a nation was expelled for its disobedience just as Adam was exiled for his. This is the point of Hosea 6:7. Just as Adam’s disobedience resulted in curse, exile, and death, Israel experienced these same consequences on a national scale. Israel experienced curse, of which Moses warned: “If you will not obey the voice of the LORD your God or be careful to do all his commandments and his statutes that I command you today, then all these curses shall come upon you and overtake you” (Deut. 28:15; see also vv. 16–68). Israel experienced exile, which Moses predicted: “And the LORD will scatter you among all peoples, from one end of the earth to the other, and there you shall serve other gods of wood and stone, which neither you nor your fathers have known” (v. 64; see also vv. 36, 41, 68). Israel experienced death, of which Moses prophesied: “And as the LORD took delight in doing you good and multiplying you, so the LORD will take delight in bringing ruin upon you and destroying you. And you shall be plucked off the land that you are entering to take possession of it” (v. 63; see also vv. 45, 48, 53–57). Just as Adam died in exile and returned to dust (Gen. 3:19), so God cast Israel out of the land to die, which the prophet Ezekiel vividly portrays in Israel’s exilic graveyard as a valley of dry bones (Ezek. 37:1).

If we read Genesis 1–3 on its own, we will walk away with only a surface understanding of the events of the creation and fall. Moses intended for Genesis 1–3 to be read as part of a greater literary whole and therefore drew explicit connections between it and the creation narrative in later portions of the Pentateuch. In this case, the Pentateuch ends as it began, with the exile from God’s presence of His sons, Adam (Gen. 5:1–3; Luke 3:38) and Israel (Ex. 4:22; Hos. 11:1). When Old Testament Israelites familiar with the Pentateuch read and heard the Genesis creation account, they would unquestionably see an anticipation of God’s covenant with Israel in His covenant with Adam, given the multiple connections between Genesis 1–3 and the rest of the Pentateuch, especially the matching bookend of Deuteronomy 28–34.





Canonical Context


If we stand at Hosea 6:7 and contemplate the prophet’s explanation of Genesis 1–3, that “like Adam they transgressed the covenant,” we must not think that the prophet was the only one who saw and pressed this point. Not only did Hosea and rabbinic interpreters see the connections, but so did the Apostle Paul. In his epistle to Rome, Paul writes of Adam’s sin:





Therefore, just as sin came into the world through one man, and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because all sinned—for sin indeed was in the world before the law was given, but sin is not counted where there is no law. Yet death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those whose sinning was not like the transgression of Adam, who was a type of the one who was to come. (Rom. 5:12–14)



At first glance, we might not think much of Paul’s statement because he seemingly repeats the events of Adam’s tragic fall—sin came into the world by one man, Adam. Yet we should pause and ask why Paul uses two different terms, “sin” (Greek hamartia) and “transgression” (Greek parabasis). The shift in terminology is not insignificant.

Both English translations, “sin” and “transgression,” capture the nature of the original underlying Greek. But if we were first-century Jewish converts to Christianity who were familiar with the Old Testament, and in particular the Greek translation of the Old Testament, we would hear something different. Paul is not using two synonyms merely to provide literary variation. Rather, the term parabasis (or “transgression”) is a specific type of sin: it is covenantal sin—an action that breaks a covenant. In a number of Paul’s statements and others from the New Testament, the covenant connection is clear:





You who boast in the law dishonor God by breaking [parabaseos] the law. (Rom. 2:23)



For the law brings wrath, but where there is no law there is no transgression [parabasis]. (Rom. 4:15)



Why then the law? It was added because of transgressions [parabaseon], until the offspring should come to whom the promise had been made, and it was put in place through angels by an intermediary. (Gal. 3:19)



For . . . the message declared by angels proved to be reliable, and every transgression [parabasis] or disobedience received a just retribution. (Heb. 2:2)



Therefore he is the mediator of a new covenant, so that those who are called may receive the promised eternal inheritance, since a death has occurred that redeems them from the transgressions [parabaseon] committed under the first covenant. (Heb. 9:15)



In each of these verses, the Apostolic writer links “transgression” to the Mosaic covenant.

In fact, the Greek translation of the Old Testament employs the term parabasis (“transgression”) to indicate violation of God’s laws (Josh. 7:11, 15; 23:16; 2 Kings 18:12; Isa. 24:5; Ezek. 16:59; 17:15–16, 18; 44:7; Hos. 6:7; 8:1) or a covenant (Ex. 32:8; Lev. 26:40; Num. 5:12, 19–20, 29; 14:41; 22:18; 24:13; 27:14; Deut. 1:43; 9:12, 16; 11:16; 17:20; 28:14; Josh. 11:15; 1 Sam. 12:21; 15:24; Job 14:17; Ps. 119:119; Isa. 66:24; Jer. 5:28; Dan. 9:5)—and recall that God gives His laws within the context of the Mosaic covenant. To break God’s law is to violate His covenant. Among the myriad texts that employ parabasis (“transgression”), the most interesting is Hosea 6:7, “But like Adam they transgressed [parabainon] the covenant.” Paul is not the first to connect Adam, covenant, and transgression. Paul simply echoes Hosea. This means that we can gloss Romans 5:13–14 in the following manner: “For sin indeed was in the world before the [Mosaic covenant] was given, but sin is not counted where there is no [covenant]. Yet death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those whose sinning was not like [Adam’s breach of the covenant].” The implication of Paul’s statement is that all human beings are universally subject to the obligations, transgression, and penalties of the covenant of works. Just because Adam fell does not mean that the covenant vanished. Rather, sinners have made themselves ineligible to obtain eternal life through this covenant, but the consequences of its violation still hang over the heads of all people. In the words of New England Puritan Benjamin Harris, “In Adam’s fall, we sinned all.”

When we collate all the biblical evidence from the various contexts—Genesis 1–3, the Pentateuch, Hosea, and Paul—it reveals that God and Adam were in covenant. Genesis 1–3 contains covenantal markers: laws in covenantal form, blessings and curses, covenant signs in the Trees of Life and Knowledge, and the covenant name of God, Yahweh. Within the larger context of the Pentateuch, Moses begins and ends with God’s sons: Adam’s placement in and expulsion from the garden and Israel’s looming exile from the land. Genesis 1–3 and Deuteronomy 28–34 are bookends; Adam is Israel in microcosm. And from the vantage point of Hosea 6:7 and Paul, both the prophet and the Apostle place Adam in covenant with God.





Statement of the Doctrine


By themselves, individual bricks look nothing like a completed building. But joined together, each individual brick is one smaller part of a greater assembled whole—a building. We can say the same about the surveyed scriptural data: the gathered scriptural data provides the building blocks for assembling the doctrine of the covenant of works. The two parties of the covenant are the triune God and Adam, which is especially evident in the opening creation narrative—no one else is present. The conditions of the covenant are clear. Adam was supposed to obey God’s commands: the command to be fruitful, multiply, fill all the earth, and subdue it (Gen. 1:28) and the command not to eat from the Tree of Knowledge (2:16–17). God told Adam that if he disobeyed, he would die. The contrariwise blessing is implicit in the threat of death—namely, life. God exiled Adam and Eve from the garden, “lest he reach out his hand and take also of the tree of life and eat, and live forever” (3:22). Thus, had Adam obeyed, God would have eventually permitted him to eat from the Tree of Life and secure eternal life for himself and for his offspring upon the completion of his test. Westminster Confession 7.2 draws the connection between life and obedience: “The first covenant made with man was a covenant of works, wherein life was promised to Adam; and in him to his posterity, upon condition of perfect and personal obedience.” To support this statement, the Westminster divines cite Galatians 3:12 and Romans 10:5.

Paul writes: “But the law is not of faith, rather ‘The one who does them shall live by them’” (Gal. 3:12), and “For Moses writes about the righteousness that is based on the law, that the person who does the commandments shall live by them” (Rom. 10:5). In both verses, Paul appeals to and explains Leviticus 18:5, “You shall therefore keep my statutes and my rules; if a person does them, he shall live by them: I am the LORD.” Paul quotes this verse to show that in the doctrine of justification, faith and works stand in antithesis. When God justifies a person, He declares him righteous—that is, he is in conformity with the requirements of the law. Paul explains that there are only two paths to a good verdict: either perfect obedience to the law or faith in Jesus Christ. Under the covenant of works, Adam had to secure eternal life through his perfect, personal, and perpetual obedience to God’s commands. This is why Leviticus 18:5—“If a person does [the commandments], he shall live by them”—is relevant to the covenant of works, especially considering Paul’s use of this verse in Romans and Galatians. Paul simply echoes the teaching of Jesus on this vital point.

When Jesus was teaching, a lawyer stood up and asked Him, “Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?” (Luke 10:25). Jesus responded: “What is written in the Law? How do you read it?” (v. 26). The lawyer answered by quoting the first and second greatest commandments: “You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind, and your neighbor as yourself” (v. 27; cf. Deut. 6:4–6; Lev. 19:18). How did Jesus respond? He quoted Leviticus 18:5: “You have answered correctly; do this, and you will live” (Luke 10:28, emphasis added). Jesus, of course, did not undermine the gospel in any way with His response. Rather, He simply explained how the law works: obey perfectly, and you receive the promised reward of the covenant of works, eternal life. But what Jesus did not tell the lawyer was whether he could, sinner that he was, perfectly obey the law. We know, of course, that sinners cannot, “for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God” (Rom. 3:23). That all people are sinners turns us to a crucial element of the covenant of works—namely, the doctrine of imputation.

The Apostle Paul explains how Adam’s actions affected all human beings: “Therefore, . . . sin came into the world through one man, and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because all sinned” (Rom. 5:12). When Adam sinned, all people sinned. Yet how is this possible? Why does God hold all people accountable for Adam’s actions? Adam was our covenantal, or federal, representative. The Latin word for “covenant” is foedus, from which we get the word federal. In a representative republic such as the United States, voters elect senators, for example, to represent their state’s interests in the nation’s capital—they are federal representatives. In this case, God created Adam and appointed him as our federal representative. Paul contrasts the representative actions of the two covenantal heads, Adam and Christ: “Therefore, as one trespass led to condemnation for all men, so one act of righteousness leads to justification and life for all men. For as by the one man’s disobedience the many were constituted sinners, so by the one man’s obedience the many will be constituted righteous” (vv. 18–19, author’s translation). When Adam sinned, he placed everyone whom he represented into the category of sinner; conversely, God places all those whom Christ represents into the category of righteous. In more technical terms, God imputes (or credits) Adam’s sin to all his offspring and imputes Christ’s obedience and suffering to those who believe in Him. The next chapter on the covenant of grace drills down into the doctrine of imputation in greater detail.

Finally, the signs of the covenant of works are the two trees: the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil and the Tree of Life. We must not think that these trees had any poisonous or magical qualities, that once consumed their fruit would impart either death or life. Rather, remember that God’s revelation follows the word-act-word pattern. God speaks His word, He gives His revelation in some action, and then He speaks His interpretive word to explain His word and action. God is His own interpreter. In this case, when God gave His command to Adam, He gave it with an accompanying visible sign, the Tree of Knowledge. The Tree of Knowledge is a visible manifestation of God’s command, His law. It should not surprise us, then, that the Tree of Knowledge bears a likeness to God’s law. When the serpent tempted Eve to eat from the tree, Eve beheld it and “saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree was to be desired to make one wise” (Gen. 3:6, emphasis added). This is how the psalmist characterizes God’s law: “The law of the LORD is perfect, . . . making wise the simple . . . , enlightening the eyes” (Ps. 19:7–8). The Tree of Knowledge was a visible sign of the covenant, a reminder of God’s covenantal command, and it would indeed make Adam and Eve wise if they feared the Lord and obeyed His command. Conversely, the Tree of Life was a visible form of God’s implicit promise to give Adam and his offspring eternal life upon the completion of his labors. The trees were sacred signs, or sacraments, of God’s word—the promise of life and the threat of death.





Conclusion


God created and entered into a covenant with Adam, but like the covenant of redemption, this agreement was not a cold business transaction. In our culture, obedience is virtually a curse word—waving a verbal white flag that one surrenders his rights or that someone robs another of his will to live as he chooses. The Bible paints obedience in an entirely different light. Covenant, law, and love meet and embrace in the first and greatest commandment: “Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God, the LORD is one. You shall love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your might. And these words that I command you today shall be on your heart” (Deut. 6:4–6). Obedience and love go hand in hand. Equally, the covenant of works was the arena of God’s love. Although 1 Samuel 18:3 records these words about Jonathan’s covenant with David, they also say as much about God’s covenant with Adam: “Then Jonathan made a covenant with David, because he loved him as his own soul.” God showered Adam in blessings and His love. Above all else, the covenant of works showcases love—God’s love for Adam and the opportunity for Adam to love God. But sadly, we all know the bitter and dreadful outcome of the covenant of works. The prophet Samuel spoke the following words to Saul, but they can just as easily apply to Adam’s rebellion: “You have done foolishly. You have not kept the command of the LORD your God, with which he commanded you. For then the LORD would have established your kingdom . . . forever. But now your kingdom shall not continue. The LORD has sought out a man after his own heart, and the LORD has commanded him to be prince over his people, because you have not kept what the LORD commanded you” (1 Sam. 13:13–14). In the words of Isaac Watts’ hymn “Original Sin; or, The First and Second Adam”:





Adam, our father and our head,

Transgressed, and justice doomed us dead;

The fiery law speaks all despair:

There’s no reprieve nor pardon there.



Blessedly, though Adam failed, in love God sent another, the last Adam, to take up the abandoned work of the first. Again, Watts writes:





But, O unutterable grace

The Son of God takes Adam’s place;

Down to our world the Savior flies,

Stretches his arms, and bleeds, and dies.



We therefore turn to the work of the last Adam and the covenant of grace.





Questions for Review


1. Must a specific term be present for the doctrine to be present in a passage of Scripture? Why or why not?



2. In what three contexts should we place God’s interactions with Adam to obtain a better reading of Genesis 1–3?



3. What elements are present in Genesis 1–3 that signal the existence of a covenant between God and Adam?



4. Why is it important to read Genesis 1–3 in concert with Deuteronomy 28–34?



5. How does Hosea 6:7 draw Adam and Israel together?



6. Why is Paul’s use of parabasis (“transgression”) important in Romans 5:13–14?



7. How is imputation a part of the covenant of works?



8. Who are the two parties to the covenant of works?



9. What conditions does God set for fulfilling the covenant of works?



10. What is the penalty for not keeping the covenant of works?



11. What is the reward for keeping the covenant of works?



12. What are the sacramental signs of the covenant of works?



13. Why is love so important to the covenant of works?





4



The Covenant of Grace





In the wake of Adam’s fall, Adam and Eve stood trembling in the presence of God—He came to judge them for their covenantal transgression, their eating of the forbidden fruit. God pronounced His judgment on them. He judged the serpent for his role in the fall—he was cursed and would crawl on his belly and eat the dust of the earth all the days of his life (Gen. 3:14). But before God dispensed His judgment to Adam and Eve, He gave them hope: “I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and her offspring; he shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise his heel” (v. 15). Even though Eve’s pain in childbirth was multiplied and she would strive against her husband, and Adam would till the dust of the ground and harvest bread by the sweat of his brow until he died, they would suffer this discipline in the hope of redemption. God would send the Seed of the woman, One like Adam, to redeem Adam, Eve, and their offspring from the ravaging effects of the fall. This is also, then, the first promise of the gospel, what some theologians call the protoevangelium. In other words, this is the first promise of the covenant of grace. Westminster Confession 7.3 describes the covenant of grace in the following manner:





Man, by his fall, having made himself incapable of life by that covenant, the Lord was pleased to make a second, commonly called the covenant of grace; wherein he freely offereth unto sinners life and salvation by Jesus Christ; requiring of them faith in him, that they may be saved, and promising to give unto all those that are ordained unto eternal life his Holy Spirit, to make them willing, and able to believe.



The covenant of grace stands in stark contrast to the covenant of works. God gave to Adam the possibility of eternal life on the basis of his obedience. In the covenant of grace, He gives the gift of eternal life by faith in the work of Christ. God does not change Adam’s vocation but instead sends His Son, Jesus, the last Adam, to fulfill Adam’s failed work. The blessings of Christ’s completed work come only to those who believe in Him by grace alone through faith alone.

This chapter first briefly sketches the historical origins of the covenant of grace. Second, it traces the covenant of grace from the first promise to Adam and Eve through the various biblical covenants as it culminates in the new covenant in Christ. Third, the chapter collates the biblical evidence to create a statement of the doctrine. The chapter ends with observations about the aim and goal of the covenant of grace, which is the unmerited and undeserved love of God given to sinners in Christ through the outpouring of the Spirit.





Historical Origins


Theologians have not always employed the term covenant of grace, but they have promoted the substance of the term in contending that ever since the fall, salvation has been by grace alone through faith alone in Christ alone. Church fathers such as Irenaeus of Lyons recognized that various covenants spanned redemptive history but that, despite their differences, there was a common underlying purpose behind them all—namely, one and the same God stands behind them all, and He gives them for the salvation of sinners. Irenaeus was refuting the claims of the ancient heretic Marcion, who believed that there were two gods—the god of the Old Testament and the god of the New—one of wrath and another of love. Irenaeus countered this claim by saying that there was one God who stood behind all His covenants. In fact, he argued that Abraham’s faith was the same as that of New Testament believers in Christ. Theologians in the Middle Ages lost sight of this theological point, but the sixteenth-century Reformers reclaimed it. Reformers such as Huldrych Zwingli and Heinrich Bullinger pressed the unity of the covenants over against the claims of Anabaptists, who argued that the Old Testament was irrelevant for New Testament Christians.

Reformed theologians codified the idea of the unity of the Testaments in the Westminster Confession. In a similar vein as Irenaeus, they observed that the covenant of grace was differently administered during the time of the law versus the gospel, or under the Old and New Testaments. Under the law, God administered the covenant of grace by promises, prophecies, sacrifices, circumcision, the Passover lamb, and other types, which all foreshadowed Christ, the Seed of the woman (WCF 7.5). Conversely, during the New Testament, Christ the substance was revealed (WCF 7.6). Or in the words of the Westminster Confession’s chapter on the doctrine of Christ:





Although the work of redemption was not actually wrought by Christ till after his incarnation, yet the virtue, efficacy, and benefits thereof were communicated unto the elect, in all ages successively from the beginning of the world, in and by those promises, types, and sacrifices, wherein he was revealed, and signified to be the seed of the woman which should bruise the serpent’s head; and the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world; being yesterday and today the same, and forever. (WCF 8.6)



The shadows gave way to the reality, Jesus. In the simplest of terms, Old Testament saints looked forward to the advent of Christ, and New Testament saints look back to Christ. But both look to Christ for salvation, and both are participants in the one covenant of grace.





Biblical Evidence


God made His initial covenant-of-grace promise to Adam and Eve, namely, the gospel message: that He would save them by sending the Seed of the woman, a descendant of Adam and Eve, a fellow image-bearer, to redeem them and crush the head of the serpent. God also told them that the serpent would bruise the heel of Eve’s descendant, which means that he would wound Him, but that it would not prove fatal.

Three other noteworthy factors in God’s announcement of the gospel tell us that God issued a covenant promise to Adam and Eve. First, in spite of their sin, the narrative still quietly insists that God is in a covenantal relationship with our first parents. The circumstances have undoubtedly changed; because Adam and Eve have sinned, they stand before God to receive His judgment, and there is enmity and conflict in the creation: (1) human versus God as Adam blamed God for his sin because He had given him the woman (Gen. 3:12); (2) human versus creation as Eve blamed the serpent for her actions and Adam would have to work by the sweat of his brow amid the thorns and thistles (vv. 13, 17); and (3) human versus human as Adam and Eve were now at odds (v. 16). Yet despite the alienation, the narrative still uses the covenant name of God, Yahweh (vv. 13–14, 21–22).

Second, God mercifully made garments for Adam and Eve to cover their nakedness: “And the LORD God made for Adam and for his wife garments of skins and clothed them” (Gen. 3:21). God promised to deliver them from their sin through the Seed of the woman, and a provisional fulfillment of that promise came in the clothing of animal skins. This is another covenant element, namely, sacrificial animals. God preserved His covenantal relationship with Adam and Eve, but at the cost of blood sacrifice.

Third, God is in covenant with Adam and Eve given the use of the divine name and provision of sacrificial-animal-skin garments, but with the breach of sin, this covenant is no longer the covenant of works. God will send another both to fulfill Adam’s abandoned work (Gen. 1:28) and to deliver Adam and Eve from their sin. Eternal life is no longer based on Adam’s obedience but rather comes through faith in God’s covenant promise. Evidence that we have moved from works to faith in the promise comes in Adam’s actions toward Eve. God promised that the Seed of the woman would crush the head of the serpent, and so Adam renamed his wife: “The man called his wife’s name Eve, because she was the mother of all living” (3:20). This is, for all intents and purposes, Adam’s profession of faith. Adam believed in God’s promise and therefore renamed his wife—she was no longer “woman,” she who was taken from man (2:22), but now “Eve,” mother of all living (3:20).

Just a few verses later, we see evidence of Eve’s faith when she considered the birth of Cain: “I have gotten a man, the LORD” (Gen. 4:1, author’s translation). The sixteenth-century Protestant Reformer Martin Luther made the astute observation that the Hebrew text does not have the words “with the help of the” as in the ESV: “I have gotten a man with the help of the LORD” (v. 1, emphasis added). Rather, Eve simply says that she gave birth to a man, the Lord, Yahweh in the flesh. Eve believed that Cain was the promised Seed who would crush the head of the serpent! She and Adam were undoubtedly devastated when Cain proved instead to be of the seed of the serpent when he arose and killed his righteous brother Abel. Cain was not the Christ but an antichrist. Nevertheless, obedience to God’s command was no longer the means of attaining eternal life; faith in the covenant promise of God, in the promised Seed to come, is the means by which people attain salvation and eternal life. God slowly unfolds His covenant promise in subsequent covenants throughout redemptive history: in the Noahic, Abrahamic, Mosaic, Davidic, and new covenants.





Noahic Covenant


God made His covenant promise to Adam and Eve, but He also knew that if fruition of the promise rested on humans, the promise would never be fulfilled. If righteous Adam had failed in a sinless world, how would sinners possibly fulfill Adam’s failed work, let alone God’s promise? In fact, “the LORD saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every intention of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually” (Gen. 6:5). God took measures to preserve the creation to facilitate His promised redemption. God judged the earth but saved Noah and his family. God renewed the covenant of grace with Noah and his family and told him to build an ark, the means by which they would escape God’s flood-judgment (v. 18). God was preserving the line of the Seed of the woman, evident from Luke’s inclusion of Noah in his genealogy of Christ (Luke 3:36), a line that he traces all the way back to Adam (v. 38).

When He caused the floodwaters to recede and Noah emerged from the ark, God renewed His covenant with Noah in terms evocative of His covenant with Adam: “And God blessed Noah and his sons and said to them, ‘Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth. . . . Behold, I establish my covenant with you and your offspring after you’” (Gen. 9:1, 9). But we must recognize that this is not a readministration of the covenant of works; God is not telling Noah that he can secure eternal life through his obedience. Sin has entered the world, and thus salvation can come only by grace alone through faith alone in Christ alone, who is the promised Seed of the woman. The author of Hebrews makes this clear: “By faith Noah, being warned by God concerning events as yet unseen, in reverent fear constructed an ark for the saving of his household. By this he condemned the world and became an heir of the righteousness that comes by faith” (Heb. 11:7). Noah was an heir of righteousness by faith in the promise, not because of his obedience.

Nevertheless, the scope of God’s renewed covenant with Noah in Genesis 9 is much broader than the scope of His renewed covenant in Genesis 6. In Genesis 6, God renewed His covenant with Noah, his family, and animals in the ark (Gen. 6:18–21). In Genesis 9, God renewed His covenant with Noah, his family, and the whole creation:





Then God said to Noah and to his sons with him, “Behold, I establish my covenant with you and your offspring after you, and with every living creature that is with you, the birds, the livestock, and every beast of the earth with you, as many as came out of the ark; it is for every beast of the earth. I establish my covenant with you, that never again shall all flesh be cut off by the waters of the flood, and never again shall there be a flood to destroy the earth.” (Gen. 9:8–11)



The covenant of grace requires the stage of creation on which to unfold the drama of the promise of the gospel. Thus, the Noahic covenant serves the purposes of the covenant of grace, though it is not, in and of itself, the covenant of grace. How does this work?

I work for an institution that hires professors, with the chief goal of teaching the Bible to students preparing to serve the church in various capacities: as pastors, church leaders, and counselors. Each of the professors teaches a number of different disciplines, including Bible, theology, church history, pastoral theology, and counseling. The institution, however, has other employees who do not teach these disciplines; there are various administrators who keep the institution running. Members of the administration do not teach the Bible and related topics, but they perform functions that are vital to the institution. Without their labors, the institution could not run, function, or exist, and professors could not teach the Bible. Administration and professors are part of the same institution, but they have different functions. The administration supports the professors. Likewise, the Noahic covenant is a part of the covenant of grace but ultimately has a wider creational function. The Noahic covenant provides common grace by which God sustains the wider creation to facilitate the unfolding of the promise of the gospel, His special saving grace.

We know that God’s covenant with Noah was not terminal; it was not the final fulfillment of God’s covenant promise to Adam and Eve. In events evocative of Adam’s fall, Noah, another Adam-like figure, was given dominion over the creation. As Adam fell into sin by eating the forbidden fruit, Noah fell by consuming too much fruit of the vine—he became drunk (Gen. 9:20–21). And as the fall narrative ended with God’s blessing and cursing seed, so Noah’s fall narrative ended with the blessing and cursing of seed: blessings on Shem and Japheth and their descendants, and curses on Ham, Canaan, and their descendants (vv. 24–28). The seed of the serpent was still in the world and even on the ark, but so too was the Seed of the woman as promised.





Abrahamic Covenant


The descendants of Noah were still infected with sin, evident from their hubris in constructing the Tower of Babel (Gen. 11:1–9). God judged them, confused their language, and spread them over the face of the earth. But out from the shadows of the tower God shined the light of His grace and called Abram: “Go from your country and your kindred and your father’s house to the land that I will show you. And I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you and make your name great, so that you will be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you, and him who dishonors you I will curse, and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed” (12:1–3). Several covenant elements are present: God’s command, blessings, and curses. There is also a subtle hint that Abram is the one through whom God will rectify Adam’s fall—the extent of His promise to Abram is global: “I will make of you a great nation, . . . and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed.” God does not command Abram to fill all the earth but instead promises that He will make Abram a great nation.

In fact, in the subsequent patriarchal narratives, God renews His covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob by specifically alluding to Adamic themes. Each of these passages either alludes to or repeats the language of Genesis 1:28, the blessing to be fruitful, multiply, fill all the earth, and subdue it:





“I am God Almighty; walk before me, and be blameless, that I may make my covenant between me and you, and may multiply you greatly. . . . No longer shall your name be called Abram, but your name shall be Abraham, for I have made you the father of a multitude of nations. I will make you exceedingly fruitful, and I will make you into nations, and kings shall come from you.” (Gen. 17:1–2, 5–6, emphasis added)



“I will surely bless you, and I will surely multiply your offspring as the stars of heaven and as the sand that is on the seashore. And your offspring shall possess the gate of his enemies, and in your offspring shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, because you have obeyed my voice.” (22:17–18, emphasis added)





And they blessed Rebekah and said to her,

“Our sister, may you become

thousands of ten thousands,

and may your offspring possess

the gate of those who hate him!” (24:60)





“God Almighty bless you and make you fruitful and multiply you, that you may become a company of peoples. May he give the blessing of Abraham to you and to your offspring with you, that you may take possession of the land of your sojournings that God gave to Abraham!” (28:3–4, emphasis added)



But all these statements are not commands. They do not represent what Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob must do but state what God will do for them—God will multiply them, make them fruitful, and fill the earth with their descendants.

The Abrahamic covenant is part of the covenant of grace. In fact, Paul very clearly explains that God’s call to Abraham is the gospel: “And the Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the gospel beforehand to Abraham, saying, ‘In you shall all the nations be blessed’” (Gal. 3:8). This is the same covenantal promise that God gave to Adam and Eve. The biblical text whispers that the Seed of the woman is the Seed of Noah and the Seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.





Mosaic Covenant


When God sent His people into Egypt, He did not leave them without hope. He reaffirmed that He would fulfill His covenant promise—that He would redeem them through the Seed of the woman and complete His original purposes for the creation. Before Jacob died, he told Joseph and his two sons: “God Almighty appeared to me at Luz in the land of Canaan and blessed me, and said to me, ‘Behold, I will make you fruitful and multiply you, and I will make of you a company of peoples and will give this land to your offspring after you for an everlasting possession’” (Gen. 48:3–4). He reiterated the promise of the Abrahamic covenant, and even in the depths of Israel’s sufferings in the hot, fiery furnace of Egypt, God was fulfilling His promises: “But the people of Israel were fruitful and increased greatly; they multiplied and grew exceedingly strong, so that the land was filled with them” (Ex. 1:7). But Israel was suffering, and so God redeemed His people from Egypt. The specific reason that He did so lay in His covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: “And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob” (2:24). God redeemed His people, brought them to the foot of Mount Sinai, and made a covenant with them (19:5).

The Mosaic covenant is an administration of the covenant of grace, but there is more to it than just that. When Paul compares the Abrahamic and Mosaic covenants, he explains that the Mosaic covenant serves a specific purpose within the covenant of grace. Like the Noahic covenant, providing the necessary common-grace platform of the creation to facilitate the unfolding of the gospel, the Mosaic covenant bears a specific legal character that works in concert with the Abrahamic covenant. Paul explains that “the law came in to increase the trespass” (Rom. 5:20), which does not make sense at first blush. Why would God give the Mosaic covenant to increase sin? Paul answers this question when he writes, “It was added because of transgressions, until the seed should come to whom the promise had been made” (Gal. 3:19, author’s translation). In other words, when working in concert with the Abrahamic covenant, the Mosaic covenant was supposed to do several things: (1) preserve the people of Israel from external pagan influences until the Seed of the woman and Abraham would come; (2) show Israel the impossibility of obeying the law perfectly, which would drive the people to the Messiah; and (3) show the Israelites that the Seed of the woman would fulfill the law on their behalf. As Paul reasons: “Is the law then contrary to the promises of God? Certainly not! For if a law had been given that could give life, then righteousness would indeed be by the law. But the Scripture imprisoned everything under sin, so that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe” (Gal. 3:21–22). But at the same time, there are two important things to note.

First, as stated above, the Mosaic covenant is part of the covenant of grace, but unlike the Abrahamic covenant, which is largely promissory, the Mosaic covenant possesses a legal character. It bears this legal character because of its function within the covenant of grace and because of its temporary nature. The Mosaic covenant was not the terminal destination but rather only one stop along the way. As Paul teaches: “So then, the law was our guardian until Christ came, in order that we might be justified by faith. But now that faith has come, we are no longer under a guardian, for in Christ Jesus you are all sons of God, through faith” (Gal. 3:24–26). Once Christ came, the scaffolding of the Mosaic covenant came down, and all that remained was the new covenant, or Jesus, who is the fulfillment of the covenant of grace.

Second, the full weight of the legal aspects of the Mosaic covenant came cascading down on anyone who tried to treat it like the covenant of works. The sacrificial system and other aspects of life under Moses were types, pointing forward to and even offering Christ to those who by faith used them as means of grace. Those who looked to Moses’ legal demands as a stepladder to obtain everlasting life were under them only as a covenant of works and did not partake of the substance of the covenant of grace. In other words, ever since Adam and Eve fell, salvation has always and only been by grace alone through faith alone in Christ alone. Only Christ fulfills the requirements and penalties of the law. If any Israelite tried to fulfill the obligations of the Mosaic covenant on his own, there was only judgment. Or in Paul’s words: “Now Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia; she corresponds to the present Jerusalem, for she is in slavery with her children. But the Jerusalem above is free, and she is our mother” (Gal. 4:25–26). Approach the Mosaic covenant apart from Christ, and you encounter only the law, and therefore the Mosaic covenant becomes Hagar, a mother who gives birth only to slaves. Approach the Mosaic covenant by faith in the promise of the gospel, and you reveal that you are a child of the heavenly Jerusalem.

In short, Paul’s brief statement helps us understand the role of the Mosaic covenant within the larger framework of the covenant of grace: “The law is not of faith, rather ‘The one who does them shall live by them’” (Gal. 3:12). Similarly, Paul succinctly states, “For Moses writes about the righteousness that is based on the law, that the person who does the commandments shall live by them” (Rom. 10:5). If one approaches the Mosaic law apart from faith in Christ, then he must render perfect, perpetual, and personal obedience to secure his salvation. Moreover, he must also suffer and somehow fulfill the penalty of the law. But by one’s faith in Christ, the Mosaic law becomes a guardian or “schoolmaster” (KJV) who drives him to Christ (Gal. 3:24). And only in Christ, then, are “true believers . . . not under the law, as a covenant of works, to be thereby justified, or condemned.” Rather, the law is “of great use to them . . . as a rule of life informing them of the will of God, and their duty” (WCF 19.6). Given that the people of Israel were a mixed community of believers and nonbelievers (Rom. 9:6–7), this means two things: (1) for unbelieving Israelites, the Mosaic covenant was a covenant of works; and (2) the Mosaic covenant could be broken. I will explain the breakability of the Mosaic covenant below under the discussion of the new covenant.





Davidic Covenant


As God continued to unfold the covenant of grace, He revealed that the Seed of the woman, the Seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, was also going to be the Seed of David. God told David through Nathan the prophet that He did not want David to build Him a temple. Rather, God would build David a house—that is, a kingdom:





When your days are fulfilled and you lie down with your fathers, I will raise up your offspring after you, who shall come from your body, and I will establish his kingdom. He shall build a house for my name, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom forever. I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a son. When he commits iniquity, I will discipline him with the rod of men, with the stripes of the sons of men, but my steadfast love will not depart from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away from before you. And your house and your kingdom shall be made sure forever before me. Your throne shall be established forever. (2 Sam. 7:12–16)



At first glance, this may not seem like a covenant, but we must recall that the way that one enters into a covenant is by swearing an oath. And by His oath, God promises to establish David’s kingdom and give this kingdom to one of his heirs, who will sit forever on David’s throne. The psalmist later makes it clear that God’s sworn oath is indeed a covenant:





You have said, “I have made a covenant with my chosen one;

I have sworn to David my servant:

‘I will establish your offspring forever,

and build your throne for all generations.’ . . .

He shall cry to me, ‘You are my Father,

my God, and the Rock of my salvation.’

And I will make him the firstborn,

the highest of the kings of the earth.

My steadfast love I will keep for him forever,

and my covenant will stand firm for him.

I will establish his offspring forever

and his throne as the days of the heavens.

If his children forsake my law

and do not walk according to my rules,

if they violate my statutes

and do not keep my commandments,

then I will punish their transgression with the rod

and their iniquity with stripes,

but I will not remove from him my steadfast love

or be false to my faithfulness.

I will not violate my covenant

or alter the word that went forth from my lips.

Once for all I have sworn by my holiness;

I will not lie to David.

His offspring shall endure forever,

his throne as long as the sun before me.”

(Ps. 89:3–4, 26–36)



There are two noteworthy aspects concerning the psalmist’s explanation of the Davidic covenant. First, the psalmist repeats the themes that appear in God’s promise to David: his heir, his kingdom, his rule over the nations, and his status as God’s son. He subsumes this list under His sworn oath, or covenant. Second, the psalmist describes this covenant in different terms from the Mosaic covenant. As noted above (and as will be further explained below), the Mosaic covenant is breakable. The Davidic covenant is not liable to fracture. Even if the children of the Davidic heir disobey God, do not keep His commandments, and are punished by God, He will not remove His “steadfast love,” or “covenant love” (Hebrew hesed), from David’s children. God specifically says that He will not violate His covenant. The Davidic covenant as a promissory administration of the covenant of grace is therefore unbreakable.





New Covenant


With the rubble of the temple and Jerusalem lying all about, Jeremiah wept over God’s judgment on His people, but he still held out a message of hope: “Behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and the house of Judah, not like the covenant that I made with their fathers on the day when I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, my covenant that they broke, though I was their husband, declares the LORD” (Jer. 31:31–32). Jeremiah clearly states that Israel broke the Mosaic covenant. Even though the Mosaic covenant was an administration of the covenant of grace, its role was temporary. The new covenant ultimately embodied the full measure of God’s grace in salvation. In fact, the author of Hebrews writes about the Mosaic (first) and new (second) covenant: “For if that first covenant had been faultless, there would have been no occasion to look for a second” (Heb. 8:7). But we should not think that the new covenant is a completely de novo and unprecedented administration of the covenant of grace.

Long before Jeremiah prophesied of the new covenant, Moses spoke of it. God first commanded the people to circumcise their hearts: “Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no longer stubborn” (Deut. 10:16). But He knew that they were incapable of this because they were enslaved to sin. And so God promised the Israelites that He would do for them what they were unable to do for themselves. When Israel was cast out of the land for breaking the Mosaic covenant and scattered among the nations, God would bring His people back: “And the LORD your God will circumcise your heart and the heart of your offspring, so that you will love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul, that you may live” (30:6). Moses speaks of a circumcised heart and Jeremiah of God’s writing His law on the hearts of His people: “For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, declares the LORD: I will put my law within them, and I will write it on their hearts. And I will be their God, and they shall be my people” (Jer. 31:33). Both Moses and Jeremiah speak of the same thing: the new covenant, the final administration of the covenant of grace.

The various biblical covenants coalesce in the prophet Ezekiel’s description of the new covenant. I have bracketed the various covenants to which Ezekiel refers:





Thus says the Lord GOD: Behold, I will take the people of Israel from the nations among which they have gone, and will gather them from all around, and bring them to their own land [Mosaic covenant]. And I will make them one nation in the land, on the mountains of Israel. And one king shall be king over them all, and they shall be no longer two nations, and no longer divided into two kingdoms [Davidic covenant]. They shall not defile themselves anymore with their idols and their detestable things, or with any of their transgressions. But I will save them from all the backslidings in which they have sinned, and will cleanse them; and they shall be my people, and I will be their God.

My servant David shall be king over them, and they shall all have one shepherd [Davidic covenant]. They shall walk in my rules and be careful to obey my statutes [Mosaic covenant]. They shall dwell in the land that I gave to my servant Jacob, where your fathers lived [Abrahamic covenant]. They and their children and their children’s children shall dwell there forever, and David my servant shall be their prince forever [Davidic covenant]. I will make a covenant of peace with them. It shall be an everlasting covenant with them [new covenant]. And I will set them in their land and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in their midst forevermore [Abrahamic covenant]. My dwelling place shall be with them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Then the nations will know that I am the LORD who sanctifies Israel, when my sanctuary is in their midst forevermore. (Ezek. 37:21–28)



The prophet alludes to the various covenants that culminate in the new covenant, but at the same time the Abrahamic, Mosaic, Davidic, and new covenants all converge. They are one and the same in their gospel substance even if they differ in their external characteristics.

Jesus is the Seed of the woman, the Seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the Seed of David, and the sum and substance of the new covenant. This is why anyone who believes in Jesus participates in these three covenants: “For as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is no male and female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus. And if you are Christ’s, then you are Abraham’s offspring, heirs according to promise” (Gal. 3:27–29). If you are Christ’s, then you are a Davidic heir and a child of the King; and if you are Christ’s, then you are a son of Abraham, an heir of the promise; and if you are Christ’s, then you are a beneficiary of the unbreakable new covenant.





Statement of the Doctrine


There are two factors to understanding the doctrine of the covenant of grace: (1) Jesus is the last Adam, and His work is the only way to salvation, and (2) only by faith in Christ can a person partake of the covenant of grace.





Jesus as the Last Adam


Once Adam fell into sin, he disqualified himself and his offspring from being able to fulfill the requirements of the covenant of works. God did not rewrite Adam’s vocation but sent One who would faithfully fulfill it—namely, Jesus, the last Adam. The Apostle Paul showcases this in several places where he sets Adam and Jesus side by side so that we can see that they are the two covenant (or federal) heads: “For as by the one man’s disobedience the many were constituted sinners, so by the one man’s obedience the many will be constituted righteous” (Rom. 5:19, author’s translation). The representative actions of Adam and Jesus determine the destinations of those whom they represent.

Paul draws this same point in his explanation of the resurrection: “For as by a man came death, by a man has come also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive” (1 Cor. 15:21–22). All who are covenantally united to Adam die, and all who are covenantally united to Jesus live. Paul spells out this point in greater detail later in 1 Corinthians 15:





Thus it is written, “The first man Adam became a living being”; the last Adam became a life-giving Spirit. But it is not the spiritual that is first but the natural, and then the spiritual. The first man was from the earth, a man of dust; the second man is from heaven. As was the man of dust, so also are those who are of the dust, and as is the man of heaven, so also are those who are of heaven. Just as we have borne the image of the man of dust, we shall also bear the image of the man of heaven. (1 Cor. 15:45–49, author’s translation)



Paul quotes Genesis 2:7, which refers to God’s creation of Adam, to show that Adam became a fountain of life but produces only natural offspring. Given his fall and consignment to the dust of the earth, Adam can produce only children who return to the dust. Jesus, the last Adam, on the other hand, is from heaven and is spiritual—that is, characterized by the Spirit—and those who are united to Him in covenant will share in His heavenly image. Jesus as the last Adam perfectly, personally, and definitively obeyed His heavenly Father and therefore became a life-giving Spirit—He unleashes the work of the Spirit, who goes out to gather the bride of Christ, the church, the last Eve.

The Bible presents Jesus as the last Adam, the obedient Son, who stands in contrast to God’s disobedient sons, Adam and Israel. Recall that Adam was God’s son (Luke 3:38; cf. Gen. 5:1–4), and yet he sought to grasp equality with God by taking and eating the forbidden fruit. Yet Jesus, who did not count equality with God a thing to be grasped, came as a man, humbled Himself, and was obedient unto death, even death on the cross (Phil. 2:5–11). Likewise, Israel was God’s son (Ex. 4:22; Hos. 11:1), but Israel was stiff-necked and disobedient. The Spirit led Israel into the wilderness, where the people were disobedient over the supposed lack of food; yet when the Spirit led Jesus into the wilderness and He was tempted by Satan three times, He was obedient and faithful. As the church father Ambrose of Milan once wrote in his exposition of the gospel of Luke, “It is fitting that it be recorded that the first Adam was cast out of Paradise in the desert, that you may observe how the second Adam returned from the desert to Paradise.” Ambrose presses the point: “Adam brought death through the tree. Christ brought life through the tree.” Jesus ushers in the new creation that Adam was supposed to inaugurate. Whereas Adam failed in the covenant of works, Jesus succeeds through the covenant of grace to bring salvation to those who trust in Him. In the words of the sixteenth-century poet John Donne:





We think that Paradise and Calvary,

Christ’s cross, and Adam’s tree, stood in one place;

Look, Lord, and find both Adams met in me;

As the first Adam’s sweat surrounds my face,

May the last Adam’s blood my soul embrace.



We cannot understand the covenant of grace unless we first understand the covenant of works. Correlatively, we cannot understand the work of the last Adam unless we understand the work of the first Adam. But how do we benefit from and access the work of the last Adam?





How to Partake of the Covenant of Grace


The covenant of works rested on Adam’s perfect, personal, and perpetual obedience to secure eternal life. This is why theologians have called it the covenant of works—it rested on Adam’s obedience. Conversely, in the covenant of grace Christ takes up the failed work of the first Adam and offers His own perfect, personal, and perpetual obedience to secure salvation for His people. Recall that as a part of the covenant of redemption, the Father appointed His Son as the covenant surety (Heb. 7:22), the One who would be responsible for all the legal obligations of the covenant. In this case, Christ offered His obedience to the law to secure eternal life on behalf of those who are in covenant with Him. Christ fulfilled every jot and tittle of the law on behalf of those who trust in Him. Theologians call this aspect of Christ’s work His active obedience. God has imputed (or credited) to all human beings Adam’s sin (Rom. 5:12–21); we are also responsible for our own personal sins. Christ also came to pay the penalty for the broken law—the fractured covenant of works and all our personal sins against God’s law. Theologians call this Christ’s passive obedience. The term passive comes from the Latin word passio, which means “suffering.” Moreover, Christ offers His passive obedience throughout the entirety of His life—from womb to tomb, He suffered for His people.

Laying the groundwork and foundation of the covenant of grace in the completed work of Christ (active and passive obedience) is vital to understanding the nature of our salvation. The covenant of works requires obedience, whereas the covenant of grace requires faith in Christ to the exclusion of our good works for salvation. In other words, in our justification, law and gospel stand in antithesis. Paul makes this clear: “For we hold that one is justified by faith apart from works of the law” (Rom. 3:28). When Paul explains the nature of the doctrine of justification, he quotes Genesis 15:6: “For what does the Scripture say? ‘Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him as righteousness’” (Rom. 4:3). Had Adam been obedient, God would have declared him righteous (in conformity to God’s commands and law) by his obedience. But now in the covenant of grace, God declares us righteous on the basis of Christ’s finished work: “Now to the one who works, his wages are not counted as a gift but as his due. And to the one who does not work but believes in him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted as righteousness” (Rom. 4:4–5). We partake of the covenant of grace by the gift of faith, and this faith is the God-given empty hand that lays hold of the completed work of Christ. In the words of the famous hymn “Rock of Ages” by Augustus Toplady:





Not the labors of my hands

Can fulfil thy law’s demands;

Could my zeal no respite know,

Could my tears forever flow,

All for sin could not atone;

Thou must save, and thou alone.



Nothing in my hand I bring,

Simply to thy cross I cling;

Naked, come to thee for dress;

Helpless, look to thee for grace;

Foul, I to the Fountain fly;

Wash me, Savior, or I die.



Now, while we lay hold of Christ and the covenant of grace by grace alone through faith alone in Christ alone, this does not mean that good works are absent from the redeemed.

Going all the way back to the Abrahamic covenant, God noticeably revealed that He, and He alone, would fulfill the requirements and suffer the penalties of the covenant when He put Abraham to sleep and alone passed between the severed animals (Gen. 15:12–17). But God also called Abraham to holiness: “I am God Almighty; walk before me, and be blameless” (17:1). Paul captures the two sides of the benefits of the covenant of grace: “For by grace you have been saved through faith. And this is not your own doing; it is the gift of God, not a result of works, so that no one may boast. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand, that we should walk in them” (Eph. 2:8–10). God clearly takes the initiative and saves sinners through the gift of faith, and their salvation does not in any way hinge on their good works. The obedience and suffering of Jesus are the sole foundation of salvation in the covenant of grace. At the same time, however, God also prepares good works in advance so that saved sinners should walk in them. In other words, in the covenant of works, Adam is supposed to secure eternal life by his own obedience. In the covenant of grace, Christ obtains eternal life for His people through His obedience and suffering. We do not produce good works to be saved. Rather, we produce good works because we are saved. Paul makes this clear when he writes: “But now we are released from the law, having died to that which held us captive, so that we serve in the new way of the Spirit and not in the old way of the written code” (Rom. 7:6, emphasis added). Our freedom from the law comes from our justification by faith in Christ, which enables us to live out our sanctification and perform the good works prepared for us.





Conclusion


As with the covenants of redemption and works, love ultimately lies at the heart of the covenant of grace. If we take a cue from Deuteronomy, love lies at the heart of Israel’s covenantal charter: “Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God, the LORD is one. You shall love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your might” (Deut. 6:4–5). John never invokes the word covenant in his epistles, but he writes of the heart of the covenant of grace when he calls the church to love:





Beloved, let us love one another, for love is from God, and whoever loves has been born of God and knows God. Anyone who does not love does not know God, because God is love. In this the love of God was made manifest among us, that God sent his only Son into the world, so that we might live through him. In this is love, not that we have loved God but that he loved us and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another. (1 John 4:7–11)



God pours out His love in Christ through the Spirit in the covenant of grace, and His love enables us to love Him and one another. Only through the work of the last Adam can we once again enter the presence of our triune God—yet access comes not through our obedience but by grace alone through faith alone in Christ alone.





Questions for Review


1. When does God first reveal the covenant of grace?



2. List the main biblical covenants that reveal the covenant of grace in redemptive history.



3. How does the Noahic covenant function within the covenant of grace?



4. What is the connection between the Abrahamic, Mosaic, Davidic, and new covenants?



5. How are New Testament believers sons of Abraham?



6. How does Jesus fulfill the abandoned work of Adam?



7. What is the active obedience of Christ?



8. What is the passive obedience of Christ?



9. How do we partake of the covenant of grace?



10. What is the sole foundation of the covenant of grace?



11. Do believers produce good works to be saved or because they are saved? Explain.



12. How is the covenant of grace about love?





5



Covenant Signs





What God’s Word is to our ears, His covenant signs are to our other senses: sight, touch, smell, and taste. Sometimes our focus is so much on God’s Word that many believers give the impression that the Christian faith is a purely intellectual exercise—truths to be believed and propositions to know. God does command His people to love Him with all our hearts, which is the Hebrew way of referring to the mind (Deut. 6:4–6). Thus, Jesus reiterates Deuteronomy 6:5: “You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind” (Matt. 22:37). God creates His covenants with spoken words, by making agreements with His people. Yet God reveals Himself in both words and actions. As we noted in chapter 1, God speaks, acts, and then speaks again. God is His own interpreter. God said, “Let there be light”; He created light; then He saw that the light was good (Gen. 1:3–4). In all of God’s covenants, He gives accompanying signs, an “incarnation,” if you will, of His covenantal word. This chapter therefore first surveys the various signs of God’s covenants. Second, the chapter looks specifically at the transition from Old Testament to New Testament signs, the shift from circumcision of the Abrahamic covenant to baptism of the new covenant, to see how God clothes redemption through Christ in the doctrine of the covenants. This sets the stage for the following chapter, on covenant and the doctrine of the church. Our current chapter concludes with a summary statement about the nature of God’s covenant signs to remind us of their importance for the Christian life.





Visible Words of God’s Covenant


Throughout preredemptive (before Adam’s fall) and redemptive history, there are accompanying physical manifestations of God’s covenantal words. God gives accompanying signs because He speaks and acts but also because His revelation addresses our whole being, both soul and body—all our senses. God preaches to our ears, but also to our sight, taste, touch, and smell. Within the matrix of God’s covenant signs, statements such as “Oh, taste and see that the LORD is good!” (Ps. 34:8) take on a whole new meaning. The Apostle John highlighted the physicality of the incarnation when he wrote: “That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we looked upon and have touched with our hands, concerning the word of life—the life was made manifest, and we have seen it” (1 John 1:1–2). Christ has ascended, so we cannot touch the hands of our Savior, but we can touch His sacramental presence when we hold the bread of the Lord’s Supper. The ascetics (those who tried to seek sanctification by denying any form of physical pleasure) were the ones who said, “Do not handle, Do not taste, Do not touch” (Col. 2:21), yet precisely through the signs of the covenant God invites His people to use all our senses in covenantal communion with Him.





Trees of Knowledge and Life


The first two signs that God gave to Adam, even before the fall, were the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil and the Tree of Life. The Tree of Knowledge was a visible manifestation of His law. Recall the similarities between the description of God’s law, which imparts wisdom, “making wise the simple” and “enlightening the eyes” (Ps. 19:7–8). The psalmist echoes the very ideas that Eve found attractive when she pondered the Tree of Knowledge: “So . . . the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree was to be desired to make one wise” (Gen. 3:6). God placed a tangible sign of His covenantal law in the midst of the garden, but He also planted a sign of His covenantal promise: the Tree of Life. The Tree of Life was a visible sign connected to God’s promise of eternal life, which is why God exiled Adam and Eve from the garden after they sinned, lest Adam “reach out his hand and take also of the tree of life and eat, and live forever” (v. 22). Solomon appeals to the idea of the Tree of Life several times in Proverbs (Prov. 3:18; 11:30; 13:12; 15:4), but it reappears in connection with eternal life in the book of Revelation. The tree appears in the last chapter of the Bible; John beholds the new Jerusalem and sees that on either side of the river that runs through the city, the Tree of Life grows “with its twelve kinds of fruit, yielding its fruit each month. The leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations” (Rev. 22:2). Only those who trust in Christ for salvation “have the right to the tree of life” (v. 14; cf. v. 19).





Rainbow


God made the covenant of grace with Adam and Eve after the fall when He promised that the Seed of the woman would crush the head of the serpent (Gen. 3:15). But God did not immediately institute a sign of the covenant; that first sign awaited God’s dealings with Noah (Gen. 6–9). When God made His covenant with Noah, He designated the rainbow as its sign:





“I have set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be a sign of the covenant between me and the earth. When I bring clouds over the earth and the bow is seen in the clouds, I will remember my covenant that is between me and you and every living creature of all flesh. And the waters shall never again become a flood to destroy all flesh. When the bow is in the clouds, I will see it and remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that is on the earth.” God said to Noah, “This is the sign of the covenant that I have established between me and all flesh that is on the earth.” (Gen. 9:13–17)



Recall that while the Noahic covenant is part of the covenant of grace, it functions as God’s means of preserving the whole creation. Thus, God gives this covenantal sign to the whole creation—it is visible to anyone who beholds a rainbow in the sky and serves as a permanent reminder that God will never again destroy the earth by means of a flood. The rainbow reappears at the end of the Bible in the book of Revelation when John beholds the throne of God: “And he who sat there had the appearance of jasper and carnelian, and around the throne was a rainbow that had the appearance of an emerald” (Rev. 4:3). John sees the rainbow around God’s throne. This imagery conveys the idea that God is the divine Warrior but has hung His bow over His throne both as a reminder that He has judged the earth and as a commemoration of His covenant mercy given to the whole creation.





Circumcision


When God made His covenant with Abraham, He gave him the sign of circumcision (Gen. 17). Unlike the rainbow, which God gave to the entire creation, He gave the sign of circumcision exclusively to Abraham and his descendants. More will be said about the significance and nature of circumcision below.





Sabbath


When God made His covenant with Israel, He gave the sign of the Sabbath: “Above all you shall keep my Sabbaths, for this is a sign between me and you throughout your generations, that you may know that I, the LORD, sanctify you” (Ex. 31:13). How can a period of time be a covenantal sign? Time seems to lack the physicality that is common to signs—there is nothing to see, touch, taste, smell, or hear. Or is there? The Sabbath involves all the senses, actually. Ideally, the people of Israel would busily carry out their labors six days a week, and then on the Sabbath Israelites would see their countrymen cease from their labors. Why? So that they could worship God at the tabernacle and later the temple. There at the temple they would hear the Word of God read and proclaimed. They would smell the burning flesh of the animal sacrifices and even have opportunity to touch and taste them. The entire Sabbath day was supposed to be a holistic sensory testimony that God’s covenantal promises were at work in Israel’s midst. Instead, the prophet Ezekiel indicted the people for their covenantal infidelity:





“I gave them my statutes and made known to them my rules, by which, if a person does them, he shall live. Moreover, I gave them my Sabbaths, as a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am the LORD who sanctifies them. But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness. They did not walk in my statutes but rejected my rules, by which, if a person does them, he shall live; and my Sabbaths they greatly profaned.” (Ezek. 20:11–13; see also vv. 18–24)



Rather than foreshadowing the eternal rest that was to come by means of God’s covenant, the Sabbath became evidence in God’s covenantal lawsuit against His wayward people.





The Davidic Line


Though 2 Samuel 7 presents no particular sign accompanying God’s promise to David like those associated with the Noahic, Abrahamic, and Mosaic covenants, we can say that the entire Davidic line and dynasty function as the sign. God swore to David that He would place one of his descendants on his throne forever. As Israelites beheld Davidic sons on the throne, their minds would have been drawn to God’s covenant promise. There were certainly times when the Davidic line hung by the slenderest of threads and even seemingly snapped, especially in the wake of the destruction of the temple in 586 BC, which brought an end to David’s royal line. Athaliah took Israel’s throne and reigned for six years and even tried to destroy the house of Judah when she sought to assassinate the heir to the throne, Joash (2 Chron. 22:10–12). The people eventually rebelled against Athaliah and looked to the Davidic covenant: “Behold, the king’s son! Let him reign, as the LORD spoke concerning the sons of David” (23:3). After the destruction of the temple, it seemed as though God had abandoned His covenant with David, but Isaiah the prophet held out hope: “There shall come forth a shoot from the stump of Jesse, and a branch from his roots shall bear fruit” (Isa. 11:1). Even though the tree of David’s royal line was a stump, God was faithful to His word and would send the promised Davidic heir, Jesus Christ.





Baptism and the Lord’s Supper


When Christ inaugurated the new covenant, the sacraments of the Old Testament (circumcision, Sabbath, and the Davidic line) found their terminus and fulfillment in Him. Because Christ was the “amen” of God’s covenant promises, there was no longer a need for the former covenant signs. Christ, however, instituted two new sacraments to serve as signs of the new covenant: the Lord’s Supper and baptism. Jesus instituted the supper as the covenant meal of the New Testament, even as the cross supersedes the exodus as the culminating event of redemptive history: “And he took bread, and when he had given thanks, he broke it and gave it to them, saying, ‘This is my body, which is given for you. Do this in remembrance of me.’ And likewise the cup after they had eaten, saying, ‘This cup that is poured out for you is the new covenant in my blood’” (Luke 22:19–20). Jesus established baptism as the sign of the new covenant when He gave His Great Commission: “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you” (Matt. 28:18–20).





Circumcision to Baptism


As we survey the different signs of God’s covenants, a question arises. If the covenant of grace stretches from Genesis 3:15 to the end of the book of Revelation, Old Testament to New Testament, why do the signs change? Why do the signs of circumcision, Sabbath, and the Davidic line change to baptism and the Lord’s Supper? Note that the sign of the Noahic covenant neither changes nor expires, since this covenant functions as a common-grace platform on which the successive covenants unfold, from Abraham to the new covenant. Thus, when we behold a rainbow after the rain, we can remember God’s covenant promise to Noah and God’s abiding faithfulness to His Word. Similarly, Jesus is the ultimate embodiment of the Davidic covenant; therefore, His presence continues to herald God’s faithfulness.

So why do circumcision and Sabbath cease and give way to baptism and the Lord’s Supper? The larger answer to this question is that the signs have given way to the reality, Christ. Paul explains: “Therefore let no one pass judgment on you in questions of food and drink, or with regard to a festival or a new moon or a Sabbath. These are a shadow of the things to come, but the substance belongs to Christ” (Col. 2:16–17). In other words, the types (or rough sketches) of the Old Testament ceremonies, festivals, and Sabbath point forward to the antitype (or fulfillment), which is Jesus. In the words of Westminster Confession 27.5, “The sacraments of the Old Testament, in regard of the spiritual things thereby signified and exhibited, were, for substance, the same with those of the new.” We can trace God’s revelation in His covenant signs when we explore the transition from circumcision to baptism.





Why Circumcision?


The first question we can pose is this: Why did God give circumcision as a sign of the covenant to Abraham? The simplest answer is that circumcision was a visible form of God’s covenant promise to Abraham: “This is my covenant, which you shall keep, between me and you and your offspring after you: Every male among you shall be circumcised. You shall be circumcised in the flesh of your foreskins, and it shall be a sign of the covenant between me and you” (Gen. 17:10–11). As a covenant sign, circumcision has two referents: its relationship to the individual Israelite male and its relationship to God’s covenant promise.

First, with respect to the individual Israelite male, circumcision was supposed to signify the changed heart. Moses commanded the people, “Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no longer stubborn” (Deut. 10:16). Contrary to the claims of some, circumcision was not merely a sign of Jewishness, that which distinguished Jews from the uncircumcised Gentiles. Circumcision undoubtedly differentiated Jews from gentiles, but it was more than an external sign. Circumcision was supposed to be a sign of a regenerated and changed heart. The Apostle Paul explains this: “For no one is a Jew who is merely one outwardly, nor is circumcision outward and physical. But a Jew is one inwardly, and circumcision is a matter of the heart, by the Spirit, not by the letter. His praise is not from man but from God” (Rom. 2:28–29). How does the human heart change? Can a person circumcise his own heart? The answer to this question comes with the relationship between circumcision and God’s covenant promise.

Second, circumcision relates to God’s covenant promise because it was a reminder that God would keep His word: “Behold, my covenant is with you, and you shall be the father of a multitude of nations. No longer shall your name be called Abram, but your name shall be Abraham, for I have made you the father of a multitude of nations” (Gen. 17:4–5). Remember that God promised to Adam and Eve that the Seed of the woman would crush the head of the serpent: “I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your seed and her seed; he shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise his heel” (3:15, author’s translation). And now God progressively reveals that the Seed of the woman is the Seed of Abraham; thus, as a reminder of His covenant promise and visible sign of the promise that He will make Abraham the father of many nations, He commands Abraham to circumcise his reproductive organ. The Abrahamic covenant finds its fulfillment in Christ, since Jesus is the Seed of Abraham, as Matthew records in Christ’s genealogy (Matt. 1:1–2). But how does circumcision further connect to Christ?

Recall that all of God’s covenants in some way connect to Christ, and this is especially evident in the Abrahamic covenant. As Paul explains: “Now the promises were made to Abraham and to his seed. It does not say, ‘And to seeds,’ referring to many, but referring to one, ‘And to your seed,’ who is Christ” (Gal. 3:16, author’s translation). Upon closer examination, circumcision reveals and preaches the work of Christ. Circumcision was a bloody covenant ritual, and the specific language of circumcision echoes the very act of making a covenant. When God made His covenant with Abraham, He had him cut animals in two (Gen. 15:10). God then put Abraham to sleep and walked alone between the severed animal halves to swear a self-maledictory oath to say, “If you break the covenant, I will bear the curse; and if I break the covenant, I will bear the curse.” The very language of making a covenant is literally cutting a covenant (v. 18), language that we still use today when we “cut a deal.” This is the same language that appears when God gives Abraham the covenant sign of circumcision: “Any uncircumcised male who is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin shall be cut off from his people; he has broken my covenant” (17:14, emphasis added). Either one cuts off the foreskin, which is a seal of the righteousness of faith (Rom. 4:11), and enjoys the blessings of the covenant promise or that person is himself cut off from the covenant. The act of circumcision is akin to the severing of the animals in two—it is an action that reveals the covenant curse. More specifically, God revealed through His word and sign that the Seed of the woman, the Seed of Abraham, would be cut off from His people in a bloody ritual—He would bear the curse of the covenant.

The prophets Isaiah and Jeremiah speak of the Messiah’s curse-bearing work. Isaiah declares, “By oppression and judgment he was taken away; and as for his generation, who considered that he was cut off out of the land of the living, stricken for the transgression of my people?” (Isa. 53:8). Jeremiah states: “But I was like a gentle lamb led to the slaughter. I did not know it was against me they devised schemes, saying, ‘Let us destroy the tree with its fruit, let us cut him off from the land of the living, that his name be remembered no more’” (Jer. 11:19). The rough-hewn lines of Old Testament revelation give way to the dark but nevertheless clear revelation of Christ’s curse-bearing work. Paul draws on the language of circumcision to characterize Christ’s salvific work: “In him also you were circumcised with a circumcision made without hands, by putting off the body of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, having been buried with him in baptism, in which you were also raised with him through faith in the powerful working of God, who raised him from the dead” (Col. 2:11–12). The Seed of the woman, of Abraham, of David, was cut off in His bloody circumcision-crucifixion, the means by which He bore the curse of the covenant on behalf of His bride. But interestingly, Paul also connects baptism with Christ’s crucifixion. Why? The short answer is that baptism is also a sign of covenant judgment. When James and John asked to sit at Christ’s right and left in the kingdom, “Jesus said to them, ‘You do not know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink, or to be baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized?’ And they said to him, ‘We are able.’ And Jesus said to them, ‘The cup that I drink you will drink, and with the baptism with which I am baptized, you will be baptized’” (Mark 10:38–39; see also Luke 12:50). Jesus applies baptism to His crucifixion, to covenant curse. This leads us to the next question: Why baptism?





Why Baptism?


All too often, people explain the transition from circumcision to baptism as a supposed move from physical to spiritual realities—circumcision is bloody and painful, whereas water is about spiritual truths. They fail to account for the meaning of circumcision as the regeneration of the heart and that water is just as physical as circumcision, albeit painless and free from bloodshed. Therefore, a better answer to the question “Why baptism?” comes to us from John the Baptist’s ministry at the Jordan: “I baptize you with water for repentance, but he who is coming after me is mightier than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire” (Matt. 3:11; see also Luke 3:16). Christ would baptize with Spirit and fire, which finds its fulfillment at Pentecost: “And in the last days it shall be, God declares, that I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh. . . . This Jesus God raised up, and of that we all are witnesses. Being therefore exalted at the right hand of God, and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this that you yourselves are seeing and hearing” (Acts 2:17, 32–33; cf. Joel 2:28). Christ’s Pentecost outpouring of the Spirit, or the baptism that John foretold, is a fulfillment of numerous Old Testament prophecies, such as Joel 2:28–32. But the prophet Isaiah also spoke of this promise: “The Spirit of the Lord GOD is upon me, because the LORD has anointed me to bring good news to the poor; he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to those who are bound” (Isa. 61:1; cf. Luke 4:18; Acts 10:38). God poured out the Spirit on Christ at His baptism, and then Christ pivoted and poured out the Spirit at Pentecost. But Christ did not baptize merely the church.

When Christ poured out the Spirit at Pentecost, He baptized the entire creation. We know this because of how the Apostle Peter likens the Genesis flood to baptism: “They formerly did not obey, when God’s patience waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was being prepared, in which a few, that is, eight persons, were brought safely through water. Baptism, which corresponds to this, now saves you, not as a removal of dirt from the body but as an appeal to God for a good conscience, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ” (1 Peter 3:20–21; cf. Gen. 6–9). The global flood prefigures baptism. We might immediately think of baptism as involving water, and it does. But we must first associate baptism with the outpouring of the Spirit and second with water. The water of baptism points to the outpoured Spirit. In this case, Christ pours out the Spirit on the whole creation, as with the Genesis flood. Peter makes this same connection in his second epistle:





For they deliberately overlook this fact, that the heavens existed long ago, and the earth was formed out of water and through water by the word of God, and that by means of these the world that then existed was deluged with water and perished. But by the same word the heavens and earth that now exist are stored up for fire, being kept until the day of judgment and destruction of the ungodly. (2 Peter 3:5–7)



Peter compares the deluge to “water” with the coming flood of “fire.” Recall John’s words: “I baptize you with water for repentance, but he who is coming after me is mightier than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire” (Matt. 3:11). The coming flood of fire is Christ’s outpouring of the Spirit, which He began at Pentecost.

These two passages echo both the Genesis flood and later prophetic texts, such as Ezekiel’s vision of a stream of water that issues forth from the heavenly throne and floods the earth:





Then he brought me back to the door of the temple, and behold, water was issuing from below the threshold of the temple toward the east (for the temple faced east). The water was flowing down from below the south end of the threshold of the temple, south of the altar. . . .

Going on eastward . . . the water . . . was ankle-deep . . . and it was knee-deep . . . and it was waist-deep . . . , and it was a river that I could not pass through, for the water had risen. It was deep enough to swim in, a river that could not be passed through. . . .

And wherever the river goes, every living creature that swarms will live, and there will be very many fish. For this water goes there, that the waters of the sea may become fresh; so everything will live where the river goes. (Ezek. 47:1, 3–5, 9)



Ezekiel’s imagery comes from the wider biblical combination that God creates through water and Spirit. “Darkness was over the face of the deep,” Moses writes. “And the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters” (Gen. 1:2). Isaiah prophesied that God would “pour water on the thirsty land, and streams upon the dry ground.” God promised, “I will pour my Spirit upon your offspring, and my blessing on your descendants” (Isa. 44:3). God poured out the Spirit on Jesus, the last Adam, at His baptism, and Jesus told Nicodemus, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God” (John 3:5). This brings us full circle to Christ’s outpouring of the Spirit at Pentecost, the means by which He would both save His bride and judge the unbelieving world.





Assembling the Puzzle


The short answer to the question why circumcision gives way to baptism is this: baptism supersedes circumcision because the Seed of the woman has been cut off in His bloody crucifixion-circumcision and has consequently unleashed the Spirit flood-baptism on the whole creation. These covenant signs tell the story of redemption, the Seed of the woman (namely, Christ), who creates the new heavens and earth. The church therefore administers baptism to proclaim that the Seed of the woman has come, suffered, died, and been raised, and that He has now baptized the creation in the Spirit:





But when the goodness and loving kindness of God our Savior appeared, he saved us, not because of works done by us in righteousness, but according to his own mercy, by the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit, whom he poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior, so that being justified by his grace we might become heirs according to the hope of eternal life. (Titus 3:4–7)



When Paul writes of the “washing of regeneration [Greek palingenesia],” it refers to the work of the Spirit in creating the new heavens and earth. The only other place where the term palingenesia appears in the New Testament is Jesus’ speaking of the new creation: “Truly, I say to you, in the new world [palingenesia], when the Son of Man will sit on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel” (Matt. 19:28).

Christ fills the world with the Spirit, and from beneath this Spirit flood the new creation is emerging. When the church baptizes adult or infant, we testify that Christ has poured out the Spirit on all people, but especially on the church unto salvation. Yet we must remember that covenant signs are double-edged. Peter tells us that the flood is a type (foreshadowing) of baptism, the antitype or reality. God saved Noah and his family through the flood, but He also judged the world through the same flood. God likewise delivered the Israelites from Egypt and baptized them in the Red Sea, which was Israel’s deliverance but judgment for Pharaoh and his army: “For I do not want you to be unaware, brothers, that our fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and all ate the same spiritual food, and all drank the same spiritual drink” (1 Cor. 10:1–4). The Spirit was present, indicated by the presence of the cloud (cf. Isa. 63:11; Hag. 2:5). The people of Israel “all passed through the sea” (note the presence of water and Spirit), and Paul calls the Red Sea crossing a baptism. Who was baptized? All Israel and Pharaoh and his army. But this baptism delivered Israel and judged Pharaoh and his army.

It is worth observing that the Israelite adults experienced a “believer’s baptism,” since they were aware of what God was doing and exercised faith in God’s servant Moses as he told them to cross the sea. The Israelite children, even infants, were also baptized, since God delivered Israel by family households, not merely individuals. Interestingly, those who received the Red Sea “believer’s baptism” were barred from the promised land because of their idolatry and sin (Num. 14:35; 1 Cor. 10:4–11), but those who received the Red Sea “infant baptism” were the ones who entered the promised land. This pattern reinforces God’s covenant promise to Abraham that He would bring salvation to His people and that the people would not save themselves. But in the present, when the church administers baptism, we testify that God saves young and old, but that ultimately He does so only by faith in Jesus. Faith in the gospel of Christ determines whether one receives the sign of the covenant unto salvation or condemnation, whether the waters of baptism are the waters of new creation or judgment.

Once admitted to the covenant community by the sacrament of baptism, adults and those infants who mature and make a profession of faith then come to partake of the Lord’s Supper, which is a sign of the covenant of grace. The bread symbolizes the broken body of Christ and the wine His shed blood. Like the Israelite elders who were delivered through the Red Sea baptism and then went atop Sinai to eat in the presence of God unharmed (Ex. 24), so New Testament believers pass through the waters of baptism and, looking to Christ by faith, eat in the presence of the Lord. They open their mouths of faith and feed on Christ, the manna from heaven. The Lord’s Supper anticipates the second coming of Christ, which calls all the baptized to examine themselves and ensure that they look to Christ by grace alone through faith alone. When joined with the preaching of the Word of God, the signs of baptism and the Lord’s Supper thus become means of grace—the means by which God communicates His saving grace to His people. In the words of the answer to question 154 of the Westminster Larger Catechism: “The outward and ordinary means whereby Christ communicates to his church the benefits of his mediation, are all his ordinances; especially the word, sacraments, and prayer; all which are made effectual to the elect for their salvation.”





Conclusion


When God makes covenants with His people, He gives accompanying signs. What His words are to our ears, His signs are to our other senses. God speaks to us through Word, water, bread, and wine. Covenant signs are vital because they pair with God’s covenant promises—they proclaim the same message. But while God’s Word can stand alone, the covenant signs (or sacraments) can never stand alone. The sacraments are always dependent on the Word. Only God’s Word can create a sacrament. The various signs of the covenant of grace in the Old Testament (circumcision, Sabbath, and the Davidic line) give way to the two covenant signs of the New Testament (baptism and the Lord’s Supper). Nevertheless, all of God’s covenant signs of the Old Testament point forward to Christ, and the signs of the New Testament point backward to Christ. Apart from Christ, the signs have no meaning and are empty.





Questions for Review


1. What is a covenant sign?



2. What is a sacrament?



3. What are the signs of the covenant of works?



4. What are the signs of the covenant of grace, first in the Old Testament and second in the New Testament?



5. How does circumcision point forward to Christ?



6. How does New Testament baptism point backward to Christ?



7. Why does the church baptize both infants and adults?



8. When does Christ institute the Lord’s Supper?



9. Can a sacrament stand apart from God’s Word? Why or why not?



10. In what way does a sacrament save?





6



Covenant and Church





Our highly individualistic culture prizes our ability to tailor-make our world to our liking. We can subscribe to online services that curate collections of things specifically for our personality, such as clothes, books, and movies. This trend has infected the church so that people have become less interested in institutional denominations and instead choose to create their own theology. Why restrict yourself to a set menu of theological options when you can choose from a salad bar of beliefs and create a theology that is tailored for your individual personality? Why not mix some doctrines from the Reformation, such as perseverance of the saints with justification, but set aside the doctrine of the church? Why be tied down to one church body when you can be a free agent and go to different churches that best suit your needs? Why join a church, since such a commitment will unnecessarily tie you down, when you can be free to move from church to church? As common as these sentiments and practices are, the doctrine of the covenant presents something entirely different. Yes, God saves individuals, but we are not saved to remain individuals. God saves us as individuals to unite us to the body of Christ, the church. Another way to say this is that we are individuals who have become part of the covenant of grace. Therefore, we have no solo existence but are inextricably bound to the church. Covenant comprises the tendons and ligaments that bind the body of Christ together. This chapter consequently explores the relationship between covenant and church under three themes: reading the Bible, professing the faith, and living the Christian life. The chapter concludes with summary observations about covenant and church.





Reading the Bible


We should read our Bibles not as lone individuals but as part of a covenant community. The first example of an individualistic interpretation of God’s word comes to us in the serpent’s interaction with Eve. The serpent prodded Eve, “Did God actually say, ‘You shall not eat of any tree in the garden’?” (Gen. 3:1). The serpent twisted God’s word to his own purposes, and in a sin-fallen world, readers of God’s Word have continued in this path. In the early church, a heretic by the name of Marcion pitted the supposed god of wrath of the Old Testament against the supposed god of love of the New Testament. He believed that there should be no connection to the Old in the New and cut out whatever did not fit his belief. Hundreds of years later, American founding father Thomas Jefferson created his own cut-and-paste Bible, in which he eliminated ideas that he did not like. God, however, gives His Word not to individuals but to the covenant community, the church. This means that there are no private interpretations of Scripture but only the understanding that has been established by the church throughout the ages and that is ultimately consistent with and subject to the authority of God’s own self-interpreting Word. Remember, God is His own interpreter.

At numerous points throughout the Bible, God sets the Scriptures within the covenant community. When the people returned from the exile to the promised land, the priests read and taught the people: “They read from the book, from the Law of God, clearly, and they gave the sense, so that the people understood the reading” (Neh. 8:8). The people interpreted God’s Word not according to their own whims but in accordance with His Word and with the assistance of the priests. The “people gathered as one man into the square” (v. 1) to read and understand the Word. Likewise, when the Ethiopian eunuch read the prophet Isaiah, Philip ran to him and asked, “Do you understand what you are reading?” (Acts 8:30). The eunuch responded, “How can I, unless someone guides me?” (v. 31). Philip helped the eunuch understand Isaiah—there, two were gathered together to read; they read God’s Word not in isolation but in community.

In the ancient past, reading God’s Word in community was easier because owning a copy of God’s Word was virtually impossible. There were no books but only scrolls, and thus a person had to gather with the covenant community to hear God’s Word. Over the centuries as technology evolved, the mass-produced book was invented, bringing both benefits and challenges. For the first time in history, Christians could hold a copy of God’s Word in their hands and keep it in their homes. The portability and affordability of God’s Word now meant, however, that Christians did not have to gather with the covenant community to read it. But just because we can read God’s Word by ourselves does not mean that we should read the Scriptures in isolation. We should definitely read God’s Word daily. God commanded His people:





“And these words that I command you today shall be on your heart. You shall teach them diligently to your children, and shall talk of them when you sit in your house, and when you walk by the way, and when you lie down, and when you rise. You shall bind them as a sign on your hand, and they shall be as frontlets between your eyes. You shall write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates.” (Deut. 6:6–9)



When I say that we should never read God’s Word alone, I mean that we should not act as the sole arbiter of the meaning of God’s Word. We do not read (i.e., interpret) God’s Word by ourselves but read it in community in the light of who has come before us.

When Christ ascended to the Father’s right hand, He did not abandon the church—He poured out the Spirit. To what end would the Father and Son pour out the Spirit? “But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things and bring to your remembrance all that I have said to you” (John 14:26; see also 15:26). Remember that only the covenant people, the church, receive the baptism of the Spirit unto salvation. The Spirit brings Christ’s words to remembrance through three chief means: (1) inspiring the authors of the Scriptures to write God’s inerrant Word; (2) stirring our hearts and minds to remember God’s Word; and (3) giving teachers and preachers to the church to explain God’s Word. Put another way, Christ gives gifts to the church through the outpouring of the Spirit: “And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ” (Eph. 4:11–12, KJV). So Christ has given the church pastors and teachers, like the priests teaching the people in Nehemiah’s day or Philip explaining Isaiah to the Ethiopian eunuch, so that we can understand God’s Word. We read the Word of God, therefore, in covenant—in covenant with God and in covenant with the church.





Professing the Faith


When we read the Word of God in community, we hear the same message, and when we hear the same message, the covenant promises of the gospel bind us together—we profess the same faith. At numerous points throughout redemptive history, the enemy tried to infect, poison, and twist God’s Word. But God has consistently called His covenant people to preserve, protect, and profess the same faith. When false teachers descended on the churches of Galatia in their effort to preach their false gospel, Paul warned the churches: “But even if we or an angel from heaven should preach to you a gospel contrary to the one we preached to you, let him be accursed. As we have said before, so now I say again: If anyone is preaching to you a gospel contrary to the one you received, let him be accursed” (Gal. 1:8–9). Paul did not want the Galatians diverting their pilgrimage from the one true path of the gospel. Likewise, in the face of false teachers, Jude exhorted the recipients of his letter to “contend for the faith that was once for all delivered to the saints” (Jude 3). When we read the Scriptures in covenant, we corporately trace the lines of God’s Word so that we all profess the same faith. But in the postapostolic age, how can we profess the same faith?

The church has historically employed creeds and confessions to facilitate the profession of a covenantal faith. In the ancient church, the Apostles’ Creed (so named because it summarizes the teaching of the Apostles, not because they wrote it) and the ecumenical councils (e.g., the Council of Nicaea, the Council of Constantinople, the Council of Ephesus, and the Council of Chalcedon) gave the church what theologians have called the regula fidei (or “rule of faith”). The church covenantally reads and professes the church’s collective understanding of Scripture. The rule of faith, of course, is always subject to the authority of Scripture, but it also helps us situate our reading of Scripture and our profession of faith. Are we professing a message that is different from the gospel that the Apostles preached? Have we diverted from the faith once for all delivered to the saints? During the sixteenth century, churches created confessions of faith that stand in continuity with the ecumenical creeds and also affirmed the church’s historical understanding of salvation. The Heidelberg Catechism, the Belgic Confession, and the Canons of Dort make up a body of documents called the Three Forms of Unity, which are typically employed by churches that come from the Continental Reformed tradition. Other Reformed churches employ the Westminster Standards, which consist of the Westminster Confession and the Larger and Shorter Catechisms. These confessional documents ensure that we as individuals covenantally profess the same faith.





Living the Christian Life


When God saves us, He unites us to Christ and to His body—we become part of a church, which means that we read the Bible covenantally and profess the same covenantal faith. But when we unite with a church body, it also means that we live the Christian life in covenant with our fellow church members. There are a number of different ways that we live the Christian life covenantally: (1) membership vows, (2) accountability, and (3) church discipline. When we join a church, we take membership vows, which are “of the like nature with a promissory oath” (WCF 22.5). We formally covenant with God and His people to be a part of the church. By swearing a membership vow, we enter into covenant membership of the church and give our consent to be held accountable for our beliefs and actions. What is the standard for our accountability? God’s law.

We need to remember the important distinction between the law as a covenant versus a rule. As a covenant, the law requires perfect, personal, and perpetual obedience and for those outside of Christ is “a covenant of works, to be thereby justified, or condemned” (WCF 19.6). True believers are under the law not as a covenant but rather as a rule, whereby it serves as a guide for “life informing them of the will of God, and their duty.” The law as a rule “directs and binds them to walk accordingly” so that believers can discover the “sinful pollutions of their nature, hearts, and lives” and examine themselves so that they can come to a “further conviction of, humiliation for, and hatred” of their sin. The law as a rule also helps believers have “a clearer sight of the need they have of Christ, and the perfection of his obedience” (WCF 19.6). The law as a rule with these various uses is not “contrary to the grace of the gospel, but . . . sweetly compl[ies] with it” (WCF 19.7). As with God’s other covenants, whether with Adam and Eve in the garden, Noah, Abraham, Moses, or David, God holds His people to a covenantal standard. We must, of course, recognize the differences between the covenants of works and grace, law and gospel, lest we confuse them and obscure the all-sufficient nature of Christ’s work as the sole foundation for salvation. But if we fall short of God’s law, then the covenant bond of church membership facilitates church discipline.

The term church discipline sounds ominous, but the practice neither begins nor ends with excommunication. Ideally, church discipline begins with discipleship. In other words, the covenant community nurtures, educates, and guides people in the Christian life. Paul instructed Titus to ensure that the churches he oversaw engaged in discipleship:





But as for you, teach what accords with sound doctrine. Older men are to be sober-minded, dignified, self-controlled, sound in faith, in love, and in steadfastness. Older women likewise are to be reverent in behavior, not slanderers or slaves to much wine. They are to teach what is good, and so train the young women to love their husbands and children, to be self-controlled, pure, working at home, kind, and submissive to their own husbands, that the word of God may not be reviled. Likewise, urge the younger men to be self-controlled. (Titus 2:1–6)



Older Christians are supposed to teach younger Christians, but if a person strays from the norms of God’s law, there are more formal processes of accountability.

Paul, for example, rebuked the members of the Corinthian church because they tolerated sexual immorality from someone who claimed to be a Christian. Paul instructed them, “When you are assembled in the name of the Lord Jesus and my spirit is present, with the power of our Lord Jesus, you are to deliver this man to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord” (1 Cor. 5:4–5). The covenant community cannot act however it chooses but must always act in accordance with God’s moral law, the standard of His covenants. If a person unrepentantly persists in his sin, then the church has the moral obligation to impose church discipline, such as giving a formal admonition or rebuke, barring the person from the Lord’s Supper, or even excommunicating him (Matt. 18:15–20). Church discipline follows the covenantal patterns of the Old Testament, which spelled out various penalties for someone who had sinned, whether being placed outside the camp or even executed for a capital offense. In the new covenant, however, there is no execution but only discipline. Excommunication tells a person that his conduct matches neither his union with Christ nor God’s law and that if he persists in his impenitence, then he might not actually be saved. That person, rather than Christ, will have to suffer the curses of the covenant. Yet church discipline imposes not punishment but accountability, and it has repentance and restoration as its goal. In the words of the Westminster Confession:





Church censures are necessary, for the reclaiming and gaining of offending brethren, for deterring of others from the like offenses, for purging out of that leaven which might infect the whole lump, for vindicating the honor of Christ, and the holy profession of the gospel, and for preventing the wrath of God, which might justly fall upon the church, if they should suffer his covenant, and the seals thereof, to be profaned by notorious and obstinate offenders. (WCF 30.3)



Church discipline, therefore, is an aspect of covenant life that each and every person in the church needs. We live in a covenant community and look to one another for accountability.

As the covenant community, we seek to stir up one another to love and good works, encouraging one another as we see the day of the Lord’s return approaching (Heb. 10:24–25). In the words of the Preacher:





Two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their toil. For if they fall, one will lift up his fellow. But woe to him who is alone when he falls and has not another to lift him up! Again, if two lie together, they keep warm, but how can one keep warm alone? And though a man might prevail against one who is alone, two will withstand him—a threefold cord is not quickly broken. (Eccl. 4:9–12)



We do not live the Christian life as lone rangers, all alone and without support. We are part of the covenant community that provides accountability and, if necessary, correction.





Conclusion


In the end, we must not forget that God saves us and places us within a covenant where He joins us to the body of Christ, the church. Such a salvation is an outpouring of God’s love in Christ through the Spirit, which means that above all else, the covenant community is supposed to be a place of love. When we teach others how to read the Bible, we teach them about God’s love in Christ—His covenant faithfulness throughout the ages. When we corporately confess our covenantal faith, we join the chorus throughout the ages to proclaim and profess the faith once delivered to the saints. When we hold one another accountable to the moral standards of God’s covenant, we do not insist on a puritanical perfection but rather in love embrace one another so that we stay on the path of righteousness. “Beloved, if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another. No one has ever seen God; if we love one another, God abides in us and his love is perfected in us” (1 John 4:11–12).





Questions for Review


1. In what ways does the doctrine of the covenant provide the context for the Christian life?



2. How is the covenant community supposed to shape our reading of Scripture?



3. How is the covenant community supposed to shape our profession of faith?



4. How is the covenant community supposed to shape our Christian walk?



5. What is the ideal function of church discipline? Where does it begin and end?



6. Is punishment the goal of church discipline? Why or why not?



7. Why is church membership important?





Conclusion





When we stand back and look at the canvas of Scripture, we can see the beautiful painting of Christ’s covenant marriage to His bride, the church. We know that Christ laid down His life for her so that He might present her as holy, blameless, and without blemish before the throne of God. We see her bedecked in a garment of fine white linen and seated at the marriage supper of the Lamb. But with a greater knowledge of God’s covenants, we can look closer at this painting and notice intricate details and brushstrokes that we could not initially see. The triune God covenanted before the foundation of the world to save the bride. The Father appointed His Son as Mediator and covenant surety by His sworn oath when He made Him a Priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek. The Father and Son also determined to send the Spirit to gather the Son’s bride—to call her to the wedding feast. The triune God launched this redemptive plan by creating Adam, who was a type of the One to come, and made a covenant with him: to be fruitful, multiply, fill all the earth, and subdue it, and not to eat from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. Rather than bask in the glory and fullness of God’s love by showing his covenant Lord obedience to His commands, Adam rebelled. But not all was lost.

God promised to redeem the sons of Adam through the Seed of the woman—He would crush the head of the serpent and conquer sin and death. God did not set aside the covenant of works but sent someone who would faithfully fulfill it. He slowly unfurled His covenant of grace through a succession of covenants with Noah, Abraham, Moses, and David, culminating in the new covenant. Christ is not merely the fulfillment of the covenant of grace; He is the covenant of grace. And the only way that we can lay hold of His law-fulfilling, curse-bearing, life-redeeming work is to trust in Him by grace alone through faith alone in Christ alone. In the words of John Milton’s Paradise Regained:

I who e’re while the happy Garden sung, By one man’s disobedience lost, now sing Recover’d Paradise to all mankind,

By one man’s firm obedience fully tri’d Through all temptation, and the Tempter foil’d In all his wiles, defeated and repuls’t, And Eden rais’d in the vast Wilderness.



Jesus is the faithful last Adam, and by grace, we are His bride, the last Eve. God has signed and sealed these covenantal blessings with baptism and the Lord’s Supper. As we revel in God’s covenants, let us pray that God would hasten the day. Maranatha—come quickly, Lord Jesus, and seat us at the feast, that we may sup at Your table and know of Your unending covenant love.





Appendix



For Further Study





C.S. Lewis once observed that too many people believed that ancient books should be read only by professionals and that amateurs should content themselves with reading modern books. He believed that this approach to learning was completely wrongheaded because we need the fresh breeze of centuries past blowing through our minds to remind us of truths that we have forgotten. Old books are not infallible and they do make mistakes, but not necessarily the same mistakes that we make. This means that we can gain a wealth of knowledge from reading old books. Moreover, if we take seriously Paul’s instruction that Christ has given gifts to the church in the form of pastors and teachers, then this means that we can profit from the teachers and preachers of the present as well as from those of every other age in the church. Lewis proposed a general rule that after reading a new book, you should not turn to read another new one until you have read an old one. Or read one old book for every three new books. Thus, this brief appendix offers suggestions for old books on the doctrine of the covenants. Some may wonder why I have included some titles and omitted others. My selection of a title largely rests on whether it is available online, for free, or in reprint editions. These books can be found by doing an internet search or consulting an online bookseller.





Intermediate Books


Among those volumes that might be classified as intermediate-level books, several fit the bill. The first book is The Marrow of Modern Divinity, published in 1646 and most likely written by Edward Fisher. The book was endorsed by a number of Westminster divines and covers the covenants of works and grace in part 1. It was later republished by the Scottish Presbyterian theologian Thomas Boston, who made a number of notations and additions. Multiple editions are available for free on the internet, and various print editions are also available. Boston is the author of two other noteworthy titles, A View of the Covenant of Works from the Sacred Records (1775) and A View of the Covenant of Grace from the Sacred Records (1775). Another Scottish Presbyterian minister by the name of John Colquhoun wrote two books, A Treatise on the Covenant of Works (1821) and A Treatise on the Covenant of Grace (1818). Edward Leigh’s 1633 work A Treatise of the Divine Promises is also worth careful study. Leigh’s work is interesting because he was a member of Parliament during the time of the Westminster Assembly and was one of the most knowledgeable theologians of his day.





Advanced Books


For more advanced works on the doctrine of the covenants, several noteworthy titles repay deeper study. The first comes from an oft-cited but seldom-read Dutch seventeenth-century theologian named Johannes Cocceius. Cocceius is regularly and erroneously credited with being the father of covenant theology. He did, however, write a number of works on the doctrine of the covenant, but most are, as of yet, untranslated out of Latin. But recently, Reformation Heritage Books has translated one of his works, The Doctrine of the Covenant and Testament of God (2016), which is an explanation of classic covenant theology. Cocceius, however, does have a quirk in his understanding of the manner in which God abrogates the covenant of works, a view that other theologians did not embrace. One of those theologians who disagreed with Cocceius is the Dutch seventeenth-century theologian Herman Witsius. He wrote a two-volume work, Economy of the Covenants between God and Man Comprehending a Complete Body of Divinity (1677), which was first published in Latin and translated into English in 1803 by William Crookshank. This work is available online, and Reformation Heritage Books publishes a nice reprint hardback edition for a reasonable price. The print in this edition is somewhat small, and Witsius quotes Greek and Hebrew without translating it. But if the reader is willing to roll up his or her sleeves and work through these two volumes, the reward is well worth the time and effort.

A work that drills into the doctrine of the covenant of redemption is Patrick Gillespie’s The Ark of the Covenant Opened, or, A Treatise of the Covenant of Redemption between God and Christ, as the Foundation of the Covenant of Grace (1677). Gillespie’s work is dense and detailed, but he deftly shows the scriptural foundations of the doctrine and explains its various aspects. Another significant work on the covenants is written by Westminster divine William Strong, who penned A Discourse of the Two Covenants: Wherein the Nature, Differences, and Effects of the Covenant of Works and of Grace Are Distinctly, Rationally, Spiritually and Practically Discussed (1678). Given that online editions of this work are scans of the 1678 original, readers might find the font difficult to read, but I believe that they can eventually adjust to the dense, tightly packed words.





Conclusion


This appendix is not in any way exhaustive but nevertheless provides suggestions for those who want to know more. By reading these classic works on covenant theology, we can sit at the feet of some of the church’s greatest and ablest teachers and learn more about God’s covenantal love for His people.





Glossary





active obedience. Christ’s obedience in fulfilling every jot and tittle of the law on behalf of believers. Compare passive obedience.

antitype. The counterpart to the Old Testament type, which is a person, place, or thing that foreshadows a New Testament person, place, or thing. Moses, for example, is a type of Jesus, the antitype. Jerusalem is a type of the new Jerusalem, the antitype. The judgment of Sodom and Gomorrah is a type of the final judgment, the antitype.

common grace. The nonsaving grace that God formally gives in the Noahic covenant to sustain the entire creation, which undergirds the unfolding plan of redemption. Compare special grace.

counsel of peace. See covenant of redemption.

covenant. An agreement between two or more persons. Covenants can take on different characteristics, depending on the parties and terms. See covenant of grace; covenant of redemption; covenant of works; foedus; friendship covenant; hesed; Lord-servant covenant; marriage covenant; new covenant; parity covenant; surety.

covenant of grace. The agreement wherein God freely offers to sinners eternal life and salvation by Jesus Christ, the covenant Mediator and surety, by grace alone through faith alone in Christ alone. See new covenant; sacraments.

covenant of redemption. The agreement among Father, Son, and Holy Spirit to save sinners by sending the Son to save them as Mediator and surety and to send the Spirit to gather these sinners as the Son’s bride, the church. Also called counsel of peace. See pactum salutis.

covenant of works. The agreement that God made with Adam wherein He promised eternal life to him and his offspring upon the condition of perfect, personal, and perpetual obedience.

foedus. The Latin word for covenant.

friendship covenant. An agreement between two equal parties because of their bond of friendship, such as Jonathan’s covenant with David (1 Sam. 18:3).

hesed. The Hebrew term for “covenant love,” sometimes also translated as mercy, unfailing love, or covenant loyalty.

impute. To credit or account something to someone. In the context of the doctrine of salvation, God imputes Christ’s obedience, suffering, and holiness to the believer by grace alone through faith alone. See justification.

justification. An act of God’s free grace whereby He forgives all our sins and accepts us as righteous in His sight solely on the basis of Christ’s imputed obedience, suffering, and holiness, which is received by faith alone. See impute; righteousness.

Lord-servant covenant. An agreement in which one party is more powerful than the other.

marriage covenant. An agreement between a man and a woman to enter into the bonds of a marital union.

new covenant. The final administration of the covenant of grace under which all previous covenants converge and whose sum and substance is Jesus Christ.

pactum salutis. The Latin term for covenant of redemption.

parity covenant. An agreement between two equals, such as Abraham’s covenant with Abimelech (Gen. 21:27).

passive obedience (from the Latin passio, “suffering”). An aspect of Christ’s obedience whereby He suffers the curse of the law on behalf of those who trust in Him for salvation. Compare active obedience.

protoevangelium (Latin “first gospel”). God’s promise to Adam and Eve that the Seed of the woman would crush the head of the serpent (Gen. 3:15).

regula fidei (Latin “rule of faith”). The collective faith of the church typically embodied in the Apostles’ Creed, so named because it summarizes the teaching of the Apostles. This rule, however, is subject to the authority of Scripture and is never equal to or over the Word.

righteousness. Characteristic of a person who is in conformity with God’s law—not merely one who is innocent of wrongdoing, but one who has fulfilled all its requirements. See justification; sanctification.

sacraments. Holy signs and seals of the covenant of grace that are instituted by God in the administration of His covenants.

sanctification. The work of God’s free grace whereby He renews us in the whole person according to the image of Christ through the Holy Spirit, who enables us to die to sin and live to righteousness and holiness.

special grace. The grace that God gives only to the elect in Christ for their salvation. See justification; sanctification. Compare common grace.

surety. The person who assumes all the legal responsibilities for a covenant.

synonymous parallelism. A literary device in Hebrew poetry by which the author states the same truth in two different ways.

type. An Old Testament person, place, or thing that foreshadows and anticipates a New Testament person, place, or thing. Compare antitype.





About the Author





Dr. J.V. Fesko is Harriett Barbour Professor of Systematic and Historical Theology at Reformed Theological Seminary in Jackson, Miss., and a minister in the Orthodox Presbyterian Church. He previously served as a church planter and pastor and as academic dean and professor of systematic and historical theology at Westminster Seminary California. He is author of many books, including Reforming Apologetics, Romans: Lectio Continua, The Spirit of the Age, The Trinity and the Covenant of Redemption, and The Theology of the Westminster Standards.





